I just wanted to jump on here and say thank you to everyone for a great semester. I have so enjoyed being your instructor and I hope each of you have enjoyed this course. I think technology is amazing and the fact that you guys get to learn from wherever you're at and I get to teach from where I'm at is just awesome. Please don't forget about your final exam. I have it be due earlier in this course to give you guys some time for your other finals and your other courses. There is a self-grade aspect of the final as well just like you did in your midterm.

I still of course look over your PDFs that you submit for your finals. But I do think that the grade claim is a really important piece of this. I think that that is something that was missing in my undergrad and really even graduate studies. I don't feel that I ever learned to really advocate for myself and that is a huge, huge piece of the work industry, the work field that you guys will be moving into as you graduate and move on from your academic studies. Being able to have a one-on-one meeting with in this case an instructor in the work field case, it will be your boss, your manager, someone in that role. Being able to sit across from someone and advocate for yourself and justify your work ethic and say these are some concrete examples of things that I did that have helped me improve this year.

Anyway, just being able to have those conversations and recognize how to advocate for yourself and how to portray your advances and your improvements in your work ethic is so, so important. I encourage you guys to take that self-grade claim piece of the final seriously and really even reference your midterm. What did you do better this time around? What did you focus on more than maybe you didn't remember as much for the midterm? I just think it's really important. I think that believing in yourself and communicating that to other people is so valuable for academic, the work field, for personal life, whatever it may be.

I just think it's a really important trait to have. Please do take that seriously. Please don't forget to submit it as well. The self-grade is the graded piece of that. Please don't forget to submit that by the deadline. I have loved being a small part of your undergraduate training this semester.

I would love to support you in the future in anything that you undertake. You guys are welcome to connect with me on LinkedIn or stay in touch via email if you ever need anything. Good luck on your final. Best of luck with that and have a great break, you guys.