Okay. Okay, first of two lectures on approximation algorithms. So this is more of an introductory lecture. Last time we talked about how you could show that problems are NP complete or NP hard. So what happens when you discover that a problem is NP complete or NP hard? Well, there's a variety of strategies you can kind of just give up and say this is intractable.

I want a different job. You could say I'm just going to do the best I can without any theoretical guarantees. I'm going to use heuristic. I'm going to think of the simplest, greediest heuristic. I'm going to code that up and I'm going to move on. Or you could do approximation algorithms.

You could say I'm going to think of an interesting greedy heuristic, but I'm going to prove that this is greedy heuristic in every conceivable situation with respect to the inputs. And it's going to be within some factor of optimal. And that's what we're going to do today. We're going to take a bunch of NP complete problems and we're going to essentially create simple heuristics with these problems, simple strategies that are polynomial time to like quote, solve these problems. And what does it mean to solve these problems? Well, you know that if it's polynomial time, you're not guaranteed to get the optimal answers every time, but you'll call it a solution, an approximate solution, because you're within a factor of two for every possible input.

And then the last thing is it'd be great if, you know, if you could spend more time and get better solutions. And these are approximation schemes. We'll look at approximation schemes as well. So let's just dive into each of these problems depending on whether it's decision or optimization is NP complete or NP hard, and we'll define the problems as we go. But basically the name of the game here is grab a problem, define it, think of an interesting heuristic, do a proof. Okay.

That's what we're doing today. So what is an approximation algorithm? It's an algorithm for a problem of size n. And so it's going to be, it's, it's going to be parameterized, right? And the approximation factor factor might also be parameterized. It'd be nice if it weren't if it were a constant factor approximation, but sometimes you can't do that.

And in fact, sometimes you can prove that constant factor approximation algorithms don't exist. And if they do, then P equals NP. Okay, so it gets kind of interesting. And so in this case, approximation algorithms or schemes exist for these three problems, which is why we're looking at them today. But you've got a problem of size n, and we're going to define an approximation ratio row of n or IR for any input. Okay.

The algorithm produces a solution with cost C that satisfies this little property, which says that the max of C divided by C ops divided by, well, and C ops divided by C, yeah, is less than or equal to row n. And the only reason you have the two terms in here is because you haven't said whether it's a minimization problem or a maximization problem. Right. So if it's a maximum, if it's a minimization problem, you don't want to be too much greater than the minimum. If it's a maximization problem, you don't want to be too much smaller than the maximum. And so you don't worry about whether it's min or max in terms of the objective function.

And you want it to be a particular ratio. Okay. Now, I did say row of n there. So this could be a constant or it could be a function of, of right of a row of the number. But if it's a function of n, it's going to be an increasing function of n. Okay.

Otherwise, you could just bound it and have a constant, obviously. So you might have something like, we'll see one of these log n approximation schemes, which says you're going to be within logarithmic of the answer, the minimum or the maximum. But if it's a million, then if you do log of base two, then you're within a factor of 20, which isn't that great. But let's say if you're happy with it, and if it goes to a billion, it's a factor of 30 and so on and so forth. Actually, it could grow. So that's an algorithm.

If these terms are used interchangeably, we'll try and differentiate, right? I'll try that. But we do have something that we can call an approximation scheme. Okay. And the big difference between approximation algorithms and approximation schemes is that I'm going to have a little like knob in the approximation scheme that's going to let me do more work and get something better. Okay.

And that's essentially what a scheme is. We're going to take an input, an additional input epsilon, strictly greater than zero, and for any fixed epsilon in the scheme, it's an approximation scheme as opposed to an algorithm. Okay. It's a plus one, it's a one plus epsilon approximation algorithm. And so here we just say that this is a row and approximation algorithm if it satisfies this property. And here we have a family of algorithms that are parameterized by n in terms of runtime as well as epsilon.

And so you might have a situation where you have order n raised to q divided by epsilon running time for an approximation algorithm. So you see that there's a growth here of polynomial degree with respect to epsilon. And it's a pretty fast growth. If you want to go epsilon equals 0.01, I mean, even n raised to 20 is probably unattainable. But certainly n raised to 200 is completely untenable. Right.

So this is what's called a P-TAS, which is a probabilistic time approximation scheme. And don't worry about too much about the probabilistic. It's a function of epsilon. That's the way you want to think about it, the runtime. And we'll look at a particular scheme later in lecture. But clearly this is polynomial in n.

Okay. But it's not polynomial in epsilon. So a P-TAS is only going to be poly in n, but not necessarily in epsilon. So there's lots of NP complete problems that have P-TASs. And some of them have FP-TASs as well. Okay.

So let's dive right in. Vertex cover. Let's talk about a particular problem, very simple problem. What you have is an undirected graph G of VE. And all we want is a set of vertices that cover all the edges. So a set of vertices that cover, what does it mean to cover?

As long as I have a vertex in my set of vertices that I'm calling a cover that touches every, it touches one endpoint of an edge, we're going to call that edge covered. Okay. Decision problem. NP complete to figure out if there's a certain number that is below a certain value that you're covering. You obviously have an optimization problem associated with that and so on and so forth. So this is our simple setup for our first hand problem.

Okay. So to write it out, find a subset V prime, which is a subset of capital V such that if UV is an edge of G belongs to E, then we have either U belonging to V prime or V belonging to V prime or both. And it's quite possible that your vertex is such that for a given edge, you have two vertices that touch each of the endpoints of the edge. And the optimization problem, which is what we'd like to do here, is find a V prime. So the cardinality is minimum. Okay.

So that's it. So we don't know a polynomial time algorithm to solve this problem. So we resort to heuristics. What is an intuitive heuristic for this problem? Suppose I want to implement a poly time greedy algorithm for this problem. What would be the first thing that you think of?

Okay. Sometimes an answer I get to this question, like when we were doing live courses, sometimes an answer I get to this question is find the max degree. I love that answer. It's the wrong answer for this problem, but I love this answer because it sets me up for this like ta-da moment. So it turns out it's not a completely incorrect answer. It's not the best answer in terms of the heuristic you apply to get an approximation algorithm.

So we're still in the context of an approximation algorithm, not an approximation scheme. And what we have here is a perfectly fine heuristic that who knows, it might actually work better in practice than this other approximation algorithm that I'm going to talk about and prove. But the fact of the matter is that this approximation algorithm that has as a heuristic picking the maximum degree continually and completing your vertex cover by picking the maximum degree to continually is a log n approximation algorithm. And what that means is that I can construct and that example is on the slide here, right? An example where regardless of what n is, this particular heuristic, the maximum heuristic might be log n off from optimal. Okay.

So what's going on here? Well, this is a concocted example that shows you that a maximum degree heuristic could be as far off as log n, right? So if you look at what's going on here, you end up with something where you have a bunch of vertices up top, okay? And you end up with with case K factorial vertices up on top. So K equals three in this case, I have six vertices up there. I've got two down below because this is six divided by three, because K is three.

And I've got six divided by three here. So that's two, okay? Two and six divided by one here. So that's six, okay? So these edges are set up in such a way that it's a pathological example. And I misspoke in terms of the approximation algorithm.

I'll correct myself in just a second in terms of log n. It does grow with the size of the graph, but let's just take a look at this problem here and see what happens when you apply this maximum degree heuristic, okay? And we have to take into account the fact that if you have ties in terms of maximum degree, you may end up doing the wrong thing because you haven't defined what the tie break is. And well, yeah, you haven't defined what the tie break is when you have two nodes that have the same degree, right? You could do the wrong thing and pick the bad node for this particular problem, right? You have to do a worst case analysis.

So in the worst case, when you create a vertex cover using maximum degree, what's the worst case in terms of the number of vertices that we picked for this particular example? What's the worst case in terms of the number of vertices? It's 11, right? The bottom row. I could end up with 11, okay? So what could happen is you pick from the far left because that's degree three.

Notice that the maximum here is degree three of any node, right? So if I pick something up of degree three, I'm good. I'm keeping with my heuristic. I could pick all the nodes at the top, right? And then I'm done. That's a good solution.

That does a good solution. Good trajectory. But all I've said is the heuristic is maximum degree. So there's nothing that's stopping me from picking the far left. And then once I pick that, I could pick the one next to it. And then I'm down to, once I've taken away those two, remember now the maximum degree in the entire graph is two, right?

Yeah, it's two because each of the things is losing the degree, losing one from its degree as I go along, okay? So I could end up with 11, right? And so if you do the math really quickly, and this is where I'll correct what I said before, the algorithm could pick all the bottom vertices. And so the solution and the top vertices are optimal, top optimal. So that's k factorial, right? According to my parameterized graph, that's k factorial in terms of the optimal solution for this graph.

But if I pick the ones that are at the bottom, then it's k factorial divided by k plus one over k minus one plus plus one, which is our harmonic number. And that's approximately k factorial log k, okay? And this is where I misspoke, I kept saying log n, log n. But that's not completely correct. Because if I think of n as being the size of the input, k factorial is n, right? And so, so if you see here that I have log k, then remember that this is log k where k factorial equals n.

So this is another log factor, roughly speaking, right? So think of it approximately as log log n approximation, okay, which is pretty good, but it does grow with n, right? The point is that the point is this does grow with n. So it's not the best approximation scheme you can think of because the approximations factor grows with the size of your problem. So it'd be great if you could come up with a constant factor approximation scheme that would beat this one, certainly from a theoretical standpoint, right? All right, so what's another heuristic?

What's another heuristic for doing vertex cover? We did this, picking the maximum degree nice and simple, but it didn't quite work out for us. So, so I picked vertices, what else could I pick? I could pick edges, right? So I could pick random edges. It turns out that actually works better from a theoretical standpoint, okay?

Okay, so, so what we're going to do here is simply set the cover to be null, go ahead and set all of the edges to be e prime. And then we're going to iterate over these edges. I'm not even specifying the way I'm going to select these edges. And I still want to be able to do a proof of two approximation. So this is very simple. It's not a complicated problem.

This is not a, this isn't simple heuristics that are going to be particularly complicated. You just do some selections, then you iterate over the graph. You, well, and then you take stuff away from the graph. So typically, you take away vertices as well as edges. And then you keep going until, until you've got nothing left, right? And then you look at your cover and you say, what's the size of my cover?

And here we return to C. All right. So I won't spend any time on that. It's, it's simple iterative algorithm that fixes edges randomly and, and keeps going. Okay. So now comes the fun part, which is we need to show that this little algorithm is always going to be within a factor of two of optimal.

Okay. And you can play around with this example. In fact, in, in this case, you have six and 11. So that's a factor of two, of course. So even this algorithm is better than a factor of two, but it won't be if I expanded the graph and increased K. But that algorithm that, that we had is always going to be within a factor of two.

And we want to prove that. All right. So we want to prove in particular that, that approx vertex cover is a two approximation algorithm. Where do you think this, this factor of two comes from? So the key observation was in this algorithm, I'm going to be picking edges, and the edges will not share vertices, right? Because I delete the vertices once I've picked an edge, right?

So there's no way that the edges will share vertices. Well, that means that I'm getting, let's say I get a edges, so let a denote the edges that are picked. So I'm getting, I'm going to get edges that I continually, okay, I got a continuity of a edges, right? I know that in my vertex cover that obviously I have to pick vertices that cover all the edges. Now I'm picking edges. And what's happening of course is that I'm picking two a vertices.

So my C and remember my cost was C and I had C opt. And that corresponds to the optimum costs. And so the cost that this algorithm produces is two times eight, right? Because I'm picking vertices, we're picking edges, there's no overlap. And therefore the cost is two times eight. So as long as I can now say that C opt, which is the optimum, it's less than or equal to two eight, right?

I have my factor of two approximation algorithms. So, so that's it. It's a simple argument that now says show that C opt is at least a C opt. I'm minimizing C opt should be at least a right. I hope I said that right before. So, so if I say that C opt is at least a, then I've got my proof here of two approximation, because I'm getting two a back, right?

So if you look at C divided by one, so this means of course that C is less than or equal to two C opt, right? If I can show if I can make that statement, right? And it turns out that's a fairly easy statement to argue simply because of the definition of vertex cover. Remember that I'm going to have to cover every edge correct. So I'm going to cover need to cover every edge, including all the edges in a is a subset of edges. I have to cover all the edges.

Clearly, I have to cover the edges, which are a subset of all the edges, right? So it's clear that given this disjoint collection of edges corresponding to a that C opt is greater than or equal to a, okay? And that's it. That's so, so I had to cover all this requires since no two edges share an endpoint. This means that I need to pick a different vertex from each edge in a and that implies that C opt is greater than or equal to a, all right? So that's our first approximation algorithm where we actually had a proof.

And so this is kind of cool. It's, it's obviously a pretty simple algorithm. You're guaranteed to be within a factor of two. It doesn't mean that that's the best heuristic you can come up with. It doesn't mean that this is what you'd code, but this is the best approximation algorithm that you're going to cover for a vertex cover, okay? So now I'd like to look at a problem that perhaps is a little more compelling than vertex cover before we get to approximation schemes.

And that's what's called set cover. So set cover tries to cover a set with subsets, okay? It's very useful in optimization where you have overlapping sets. Maybe it's schedules, it's, it's tasks, it's people getting invited to dinner, etc. And, and you want to make sure everybody gets invited. You want to invite families and there's overlapping families because people have relationships.

And you want to eventually minimize the number of dinners you actually have to have. And that's, I don't know, hopefully a motivating example. So, so you do have a family of possibly overlapping subsets, S1, S2, Sm subset of equal to X. So, so that's a big set that we have such that I want to cover all the elements. So that's what this little equation corresponds to the union of all the selected s i's should equal X. I need to cover it all.

And I do want to minimize it's called a C find, find C subset one, two to M. So I'm selecting a bunch of these things. So C is simply capital C here is some subset of the indices. And the only reason I do that is to say that I want to do this while minimizing. I want to I equals one through M while minimizing C. So I'm going to be given X.

I'm going to be given a large collection of subsets, such that the union of all those subsets are going to cover X. And now I'm saying I want to look inside and I want to select all of them. I want to select a bunch of these things, you know, C, which is some subset of these indices. So one might not be in it, two may be in it, four may be in it, etc. And such that those subsets that are in this capital C set add up to X. Okay, so maybe pictorially here, make things clear, you have let's say a grid here corresponding to X.

So each of these dots here are elements that need to be covered. So that's my X. And I have S one through S six corresponding to these patterns shown in the circles. So what's the optimum so so the optimum S three S four S five all right so C would be cardinality of C would be three. So it's a non trivial problem. It's not clear how you're going to do this.

I've got to use a heuristic hard in terms of optimization. Optimal requires exponential time as far as we know. And we're just going to go off and say, Hey, let's design an approximation algorithm. Right. So let's think of a heuristic. What's a good heuristic for this problem?

I hope I haven't scared you this problem. It's kind of weird. What's a good heuristic for this problem, the largest subset K and in this particular case, it's actually the best also in terms of theory, right. So approximation set cover, it's at least the best that we're concerned about in this lecture, I guess. And it's pick the largest Si, remove all elements in Si from X and other SJ. So you're constantly shrinking and then keep doing that.

So you'll have a new problem. And you're going to specify the new problem on every iteration just like we did for vertex cover. And we've done many other times in this class. And the big question again is always what's the bound? What's what's the bound if you applied this heuristic? And what can you show with respect to the approximation algorithm?

What is row n here? So that's what we have to do in terms of what the bound is. And we're actually going to do an analysis here. That's pretty straightforward. It's got a little bit of algebra in it. And so we have a simple analysis that's going to be a matter of counting.

We're going to be picking the maximum number of elements every time. That's the best we can do. It's a greedy heuristic. We're going to we're trying to shrink our problem as much as possible. Initially, we have X and then we're going to get a new problem. Let's call it X not first for the initial problem.

You're going to get a new problem X one and we're maximally shrinking X one in relation to X not in a sense that we're going to remove as many elements as we can, because that's precisely our heuristic here. So the big question is as we go from the biggest problem that we have are the original problem to smaller and smaller problems. What do we you know, when do we end up with nothing? I guess when we end up with nothing, that's when the number of iterations that corresponds to the number of s i's that we picked is going to be the collection of s i's in our solution. And the cardinality of that is our cost, right? So that's all pretty straightforward, hopefully.

So what we need to do of course is show a proof. And the way we're going to do this is by a fairly, it's by a counting argument, right? Assume there's a cover c opt since that c opt equals t. Okay, so there's so the cardinality of c opt equals t. So I'm just assuming that this t subsets in my optimum cover case t subsets in my optimum cover. Now, let X of k be the set of elements in iteration k and let's assume that X not equals k.

So initially I'm at zero. And I want this I want to subscript that because I want to point to each of the problems that I'm going to have as I shrink this set down to nothing. Okay, now first bullet point, I know that for all k, including of course, X not X k can be covered by t sets. Okay, I mean, that's kind of a vacuous statement, because I assumed that X not could be covered by t sets. And X not is only tricky to X one to X two, etc. And I'm just saying all of these could be covered each of those intermediate problems as well can be covered by t.

In fact, in the solution that we have the optimal solution if these X knots are coming from my heuristic, but they were coming from an optimum solution, then then X not would be covered by by t right. If that happened X X one would be covered by t minus one and t minus two and so on and so forth. But I don't have an optimum algorithm here. I, I just have my heuristic algorithm and I'm making a fairly vacuous statement. As I said, based on my definition that the original problem can be covered using using t. And therefore a smaller problem when I remove elements from it could also be covered using t.

Okay, so, so, so now one of them covers what what can I say about one of them? What principle can I use to make a claim about the number of elements that are covered by one of these t sets? Pigeon hole principle, right? My favorite principle and such a trivial principle. Second ballpoint. So one of them covers at least X k divided by t.

I mean, why is this even a principle, right? Elements. Okay, so, so that's it, right? That's the observation. And now that implies that an algorithm, because it's going to pick the maximum of these, the algorithm is going to is going to pick the maximum. So it's going to pick a set of current size, greater than or equal to X k divided by t.

Otherwise, the algorithm would be incorrect. It's not doing what, what you told it to do, right? It's got to pick the maximum. So keep checking here one real observation and the rest of its algebra. So fourth bullet, what can I say? Well, what I can say is that for all k, X k plus one, which is is shrinking, right, is is less than or equal to one minus one over t, X k.

Okay, that's, that's the way I'm shrinking, right? This is again, a fairly conservative statement, because the fact of the matter is that I'm putting t in as a constant here, right? But t is actually in effect changing, obviously, halfway through the algorithm. I don't need t sets to cover the X, whatever it is, X k over two, or whatever it is that I have, I need t for X naught. Maybe I did a bad selection with my heuristic and I still would need t, which is optimum, remember for X one, but halfway through the algorithm, after I picked a bunch of sets, I'm still saying I need t, okay, because I just need that for my proof. So you see what's happening here, that's my shrinkage, that's the recurrence, if you will, that tells me how my problem size is shrinking.

And then what do I need? What is my stopping point? Mathematically, I've got nothing to cover, right? So when one of these things gets down to X k equals zero, when X k equals zero, I'm done. I'm constantly taking stuff away when X k equals zero, I'm gonna be done, okay? And I'm going to move a little bit between discrete and continuous here, it's all gonna be fine.

But what I have is, this is a recurrence I want to turn into a series. So if you look at this and say, what happens here? Well, I can just say that this is less than or equal to e raised to minus, you knew you were gonna get an e because you saw a natural algorithm here, right? So that's what we've got. So when you get to the point you're done, right? Then the cost is k.

So what you need is, you need to say that e raised to the minus kt divided by n is strictly less than one, because that's effectively, when you have strictly less than one element, it's discrete. So that means you have zero elements left to cover and that means you're done, okay? So that's your condition for stopping. So this done means that e raised to the minus kt times n is strictly less than one. And if you go do that, you'll get k over t just about greater than natural logarithm of m of n. The algorithm terminates if we just do a little manipulation and that implies that k over t less than or equal to the natural logarithm of n plus one is valid, okay? k over t is going to be less than or equal to the natural logarithm of n plus one, because the instant it becomes greater, the algorithm terminates.

And that's how we've got our proof, right? Because this is exactly what we want. k is our c from way back where it's the cost of our heuristic or the cost of our approximation. t is the optimum cost. That's what we define it as. And this is a bound on k over t, all right? So this approximation ratio gets worse for larger problems just like our other approximation algorithms that we didn't really prove from the first problem. That also got worse.

We had a log k factor for that. And as your problem increased, obviously the approximation factor increased. That's a little clearer as to what the increase looks like in relation to the original size of n. So it's just natural logarithm of n plus one. So so far we've done approximation algorithms, a couple different varieties. We had a constant factor one, then we had a row of n that actually had dependence on n.

Now let's move and we'll do one last example on partition, which it turns out has a trivial constant factor approximation scheme. So partition is a little trivial to define. It's just you have a set and you want to partition it into two sets such that they're not unbalanced. So your cost is the imbalance between the two sets and you want to minimize that cost. You'd love to have the two sets be exactly the same weight, but if one of them is extremely unbalanced with respect to the other, then it's bad, right? Either way.

So here we go with partition set S of n items with weights S1 through SN, assume S1 greater than S2 SN without loss of generality. So this is just an ordering thing. I mean, obviously there's there's some order. I'm not even claiming uniqueness here. I'm just saying assume that this is the order. The analysis is much better if you do this, if you make this assumption.

And I want to partition into A and B to minimize max of sigma one, sigma i belongs to A, si sigma i belongs to B, si, etc. And there's only there's only so much you can do if you have two l equals sigma i equals one through n si. So I'm just calling that two l the sum of all the weights. Then my optimum solution is what what is the lower bound on that optimum solution if it's two l? What's the trivial lower bound? Just l, right?

So I can have l here and l there. And if I had two l here and zero, then oh, we want to minimize, remember, don't. Yeah, maybe that's maybe that's what threw me off it threw me off right here. So I because I see a max and I got worried for a second. But I want to minimize the maximum of the two quantities. Okay.

And so the best I could do is keep them equal. And if I get l for both of them, that would minimize the maximum of those two quantities. If I had two l and zero, then the maximum of those two quantities is two l. And obviously I haven't done any minimization. So now you see why there's a trivial optimum solution. And it's it's greater than or equal to l, right?

Now you see why there's a trivial two approximation out yet to approximation algorithm, because the worst I could do is to l, right? I could dump all of them on one side constant time. And the other one is zero. And my cost is two l. So I'm within a factor of two in this problem trivially. So unfortunately, that's not the end of the lecture.

Okay, we've got to do better. I mean, clearly, there's more here, you'd like to get closer. This is a different kind of problem. And it would be wonderful if we could get within epsilon, right? I'm within 1%. How long does it take me?

I mean, I'm within 0.01%. How long does that take me? Right? That's what an approximation scheme is, as opposed to just a plain algorithm. So this is going to be an interesting algorithm simply because now we have to do something with epsilon, it's going to have an extra input. It's not going to be the simple heuristic where I'm going to put a maximum degree or maximum number of elements or anything like that.

I want to take this epsilon, and I actually do something with it. Okay, so how does this work? Well, basically, what happens in Ptos or in a bunch of them is that you essentially do an exponential amount of work given a particular epsilon to get a partial optimum solution. So you can think of epsilon as essentially being 1 divided by m plus 1, where m is some quantity. And as m grows, the complexity of your algorithm is going to grow. But obviously, as m grows, you're getting a tighter and tighter epsilon.

You're getting guaranteed closer and closer to your optimum. And so we're going to have two phases here in this particular approximation scheme. The first phase is find an optimal partition, a prime, b prime of s1 through sm. And we're just going to assume that this is exhaustive search, which looks at all possible subsets and picks the best one. Okay, so how many subsets are there for a set of size m? It's 2 raised to the m.

So this is going to be an exponential order 2 raised to the m algorithm. Okay, I'm just going to find the optimum partition through exhaustive search for m. m is less than n. So I'm picking something that's a smaller problem. I'm going to seed this. So the way the scheme works is I'm seeding my actual algorithm, my actual heuristic with an initial partial solution. And depending on how much work I do to create the seed, I'm going to end up having higher complexity.

And obviously, that's a function of small m or 1 over epsilon. And so this takes the optimal takes order to raise to m time, to raise to m time. And you can think of that as order to raise to 1 over epsilon. So what else do we need to do? Well, I don't actually have a solution yet, because if m is really small, and by the way, maybe m can be zero as well, right? Epsilon would then be at 2 approximation.

And so, yeah, so then you've got your trivial algorithm that we have the 2 approximation scheme. So the second phase is you're going to start with your seed corresponding to a and b. You're going to set them to a prime and b prime. And what I'm going to do is for i equals m plus 1 to n, if w of a less than or equal to w of b, a equals a union i, else b equals b union i. Okay. All I'm doing here is I'm just going in a very greedy way.

I've got my initial a prime and b prime. I set them to a and b. And I say, oh, I've got this element here, which one is bigger? This one is bigger. I'm going to put it over here. And then I look again, I've got another element, which one is bigger?

That's pretty much it. So back to our analysis one last time, we want to show that approximation partition is ptas. Let's assume that w a is greater than or equal to w of b to n with, right? w of b to n with. So I'm just saying at the end here, I'm just marking the one that was larger that came out of the max as a, right, without loss of generality. So just to make things easier, I don't want to keep interchanging things. So our approximation ratio is w of a divided by l.

W of a could be, could at best be l if I got a perfect partition, perfectly unbalanced, but it could be a little bit more. And that's my approximation ratio. Okay. So I need to figure out how the approximation ratio affects, reflects on the runtime, and is related to m and therefore epsilon, right? So what I'm going to do here is I'm going to look at a point in time where I have a and b and remember that w of a is defined to be greater than w of b. But here I'm looking at some point in time, which is not necessarily at the very end.

I have a situation where I know that w of a is greater than our w of b or equal to w of b because I assumed it. That's how I marked it. And I'm going to look at k is the last element added to a. Okay. So it's been added. Now this could have been added in the first phase or in the second phase.

It's quite possible that for a given m, that if it's large, for example, that a prime, that a prime you could end up with is your a to begin with. It's possible, right? You got your initial seed and never added to it. And that was it because your m was large, for example, right? So what I'm saying here is k is the last element added to a. So there's clearly a last element.

I'm just marking that. And we know that a is greater than or equal to b. Now, it may be true that if I'm looking at the snapshot when just after I added the case element to a, I may not be done yet in terms of I still have a few elements and I may be adding elements to b. But regardless, given my definition, I know that the rate of b is less than the rate of a because even through the last element, even though the last element overall may be added to b, w of b is less than w of a. And I'm only looking at the last element added to a here. Okay.

So there's two cases that we need to analyze. The first one is relatively easy. The second one is a little more involved. And now I'm going to assume that k was the last element that was added in the first phase. Okay. If k is added to a, what can I say?

If k was added to a in the first phase of a, and that's the last element added throughout this algorithm, by the time you get to a partition, what can you say about the solution? What's the only interesting, strong statement you can make about a solution? So I got to a, remember what the first phase is? Well, it's optimal, right? So after that, what happened to a? Well, it didn't change.

So what you got is optimum, right? Because w a was defined to be greater than or equal to w b. W of a was optimum for the smaller problem, whatever m was, you never added anything to it. So you're done. It's optimum. So in this case, your approximation ratio is one, because you got the optimum solution, right?

So if k was added to a in the first place, this means a equals a prime. We have an optimal partition. Since we can't do better than w of a prime, we have n greater than m items. And we know w of a prime is optimal for the m items. Okay. So that's cool.

That's good. So we got an approximation ratio of one there. And remember that this is not taking overall exponential time necessarily. It's just a case where I've picked some arbitrary m, and it happens to be the case that a equals a prime at the end of the algorithm. So I'm taking exponential time and m, but I'm not taking exponential time and n, right? So the second part here is where the approximation ratio comes in.

K is added to a in the second phase. So here, what we're going to do is we're going to say we know w of a minus sk is less than or equal to w b. This is the second phase we're talking about here. The only reason sk is less than or equal to, sorry, well, the only reason sk was added to a, I guess, was because you decided that a was the side that was smaller, right? Or perhaps equal. So that's the reason you added into it.

So you know that w of a minus sk is less than or equal to w b at that time. So think of a and b here as being variables that are obviously changing, right? But what I'm saying here is even if you look, this, this is the algorithm where a and b, you constantly look at them and decide which way to go. But if you look at the last step, then you look at the final values, then you could certainly make the statement that for those values, that the w of a, which is the resultant time minus sk should have been less than or equal to wb. W of b. And you had a smaller w of a to begin with, then you added sk to it and what happened in the second phase.

Okay. So this is why k was added. This is why k was added to a. I want to be a little careful here, given that we're overlapping a and b without trying to point out what each of those statements actually means. I know that w of a minus sk is less than or equal to 2l minus w a. That's just a substitution because w of a plus wb equals 2l.

And then last little trick, again, it's algebra. So you had s one through s n. Yeah, the whole thing was ordered. And so we can say that s one, s two, all the way to sm is greater than or equal to sk. We are actually doing this in order. We're taking the bigger elements and then deciding where they go.

So we sorted those things initially. And so what we end up with is when we look at sk, we have taken care of our values prior to sk that are all greater than or equal to sk. Right? That's again, using our initial assumption. So what this means is 2l is greater than or equal to m plus one sk since k is greater than m. Again, this is not particularly tight because m could be pretty small in relation to n.

But I do know that I can make the statement that since the values are decreasing, that 2l, which is the sum of those, is greater than or equal to m plus one times sk regardless of what m is. Right? And so that's pretty much it. Once you do that, you have your approximation ratio. So finished off with a little bit of algebra. So w of a divided by l is less than or equal to l plus sk divided by 2 divided by l.

I'm basically substituting. And I got 1 plus sk, 1 plus sk divided by 2l, which is now, now this I could say is equal, right? That's, I have a less than or equal to, and then I can go less than or equal to 1 plus sk divided by m plus 1 sk. And then we've got 1 plus 1 divided by m plus 1, which is of course, 1 plus epsilon. So all we did here was use this fact and essentially relate 2l to sk. And once I could relate 2l to sk, substituting for sk in here, I ended up with the approximation ratio that I want.

Wa over l is l plus sk divided by 2. And then plug that thing in divided by l. And then I have sk divided by 2l. And 2l is going to get substituted by m plus 1 sk and voila. Okay. So that's it for today.

I'll see you next time. We'll finish up and be done with the course.