Okay, hello, hello. Okay, we're going to be doing dynamic programming today, something we've already learned, but we're going to circle back to because it is important. Here, okay, we will look at two different examples today. The first one is really review level, a cute little problem on finding the longest palindromic sequence inside of a longer sequence. It's called longest palindromic subsequence. And then we will discuss the alternating coin game today.

Okay, so just in terms of review dynamic programming is this wonderful hammer. It's an algorithmic technique that you can use to solve problems that look exponential in complexity. But if you can find this optimum substructure associated with the problem and its connection to the sub problems. And if you can characterize that, then you can do a recursive decomposition of the problem where you show that you can construct the optimum solution from the sub problems. And that's really the key step in dynamic programming is step two here. Once you've made this characterization, you write this recurrence out that relates the optimal value of a bigger problem to the optimal values of the sub problems.

And you can and you compute the value of the optimal solution through a recursive memoization. And that memoization is really what gives you the efficient algorithm because you don't repeat the solution of the sub problems. You can also do this in an iterative fashion. Essentially, you're going to be computing things bottom up. You might want to think of it as top down when you write your recurrence, but ultimately, when you actually execute the program, you'll be computing things bottom up. And you'll be checking the memo table to see if you actually solved this problem before, right?

And that would be the recursive memoized case, which is in some sense a little bit easier to think about and translate directly from the recurrence. But the other way to do it is iteratively and we'll take a look for this first problem as to how you do two different ways, at least from a conceptual standpoint, even though I might not write out the code for each of those cases. So a couple of choices here, recursive memoize or essentially do it iteratively. And then the smaller sub problems would have to get computed first in both approaches. The one thing that sometimes we don't spend a whole lot of time on is the last step, which is getting the exact solution. So a lot of the times you stop with saying, I can compute the value of the optimal solution.

The value in terms of the length of the longest palindromic sequence is seven or nine. But what is that sequence or subsequence? That requires some additional coding, some additional accounting. The construction of this optimal solution typically requires some backtracking and some information to be kept track of during the recursive memoize step or during the iterative step. So that's something to keep in mind. You're not quite done once you've found the value of the optimum solution.

And more often than not, you want the solution. So we'll talk about that as well in a little bit. Let's dive in and look at this little problem of longest palindromic sequence. And palindromes, of course, read the same front or front to back or back to front. Radar is a palindrome, just as a trivial example, a single letter is a palindrome. So T shown here.

We also have B, B, that's definitely not a word. Radar is a palindrome, did I say that? Redder is a palindrome. That's what I'm gonna say. But what we are trying to do here, given that we have this notion of a palindrome, we'd like to discover palindromes inside longer words or longer sequences. So what we have is a string and we'll call it x1 through n and greater than or equal to one.

And we want to find the longest palindrome that is a subsequence. And so here's an example to get you guys warmed up. We have a couple of puzzles here in the lecture. So character, right? And you want to find the longest palindrome, k. And so you go, okay, I will, I'll pick C, I'll skip H, I'll pick A, I'll pick R, A and C, right?

And karik, which I guess is is not a word either, but it is the longest palindrome that corresponds to a sequence of character, right? So that's the name of the game here, as you can see, we're picking the letters that form the palindrome and dropping the ones that don't. Okay, so we're going to have to use dynamic program. Well, okay, we're going to use dynamic programming to do this. And the answer will be greater than or or equal to one in the length, because we've defined a single letter as a palindrome. Okay, if you have one letter in the input, well, you just pick that letter.

But regardless of how many letters you have in the input, greater than or equal to one, you know, that you're going to at least you're going to get at least one letter palindrome out of at the output. Yeah. Okay. All right. So those of you like Python, let's talk about how you would actually solve this thing using dynamic programming. And so what we want is L ij, which is the length of the longest palindrome, except sequence for X ij.

And we're going to have I less than or equal to J. So that's essentially what we'd like to compute. And when I've said, when I've said this here, when I have L ij, I've decomposed the overall sub the overall problem into sub problems. And it was kind of obvious in this case, because I'm going to have to go in order, right? I mean, that's that's the constraint, a subsequence does maintain the ordering constraint. It's not like I can invert the letters, that would be a different problem if I allowed you to do that.

So I'm going to start somewhere and I'm going to end somewhere. And I want to have a no null subsequence. So I'm going to have I less than or equal to J. I'm good with I being equal to J because I still have one letter and and that happens to be a palindrome, and it will have length one, right? So that's my L ij. And what I want to do is define a recursive algorithm that computes L ij.

So we'll just try and figure out what the recurrence looks like. And then we can talk about memosation or iterator iteration. So if I equals equals J, then I'm going to return one, because I know that that's a palindrome by default. So that's easy. Then the next check, you're just checking to see whether the two endpoints are equal or not, because if they're equal, you can essentially grab those letters and say, you're going to be looking at a smaller subsequence that's going to get you a palindrome. And you're going to be able to add these two letters that are equal on either side of the computed palindrome from the subsequence.

So if I am sorry, if x of i equals equals x of j, then I'm going to say if I plus one equals equals j, I'm going to go ahead and return two, because at that point I'm done. There's nothing else to do. Else I'm going to return two plus L of i plus one L sorry, Lj minus one. So I'm going to look inside. And I've got these two letters on either side, they're equal. And I can always pretend, I'm sorry, prepend to the palindrome, I got from the letter and then append the same letter.

And I got two plus whatever value I get from my quantity. So far it's not really particularly interesting from a standpoint of constructing the optimum solution. But this last line that we have here, where we have the case that the two letters are not equal is the most interesting line of code. That's the most interesting aspect of this algorithm. So what you're going to do is you're going to say, I need to look at two different sub problems. And I need to evaluate both of these sub problems.

And the first sub problem is since the two letters are different, I'm going to have to drop one of them. And I'm going to look inside, I'm going to say, in this case, I'm going to drop the ith letter, and I'm going to get Li plus one j. And in the second case, I'm going to drop the jth letter, and I'm going to get ij minus one. And that's it. So it's a max here. And there's nothing that's being added here, because those two letters, one of them had to get dropped.

They weren't equal. So one of them has to get dropped. You're not adding anything to this. So we're good. So now we've computed the value of the optimum, the optimal solution. So just to be clear, we're not done done in terms of our steps from the review slide in the beginning of lecture, because we don't have the code that corresponds to actually computing the sequence, but it's not too hard.

That's going to be on your problem set this week. So you've got a good start from lecture. But you need a little bit of chasing backwards in this recursion to actually compute things. What is the complexity of what we wrote up here, though? Let's think about that. It'll be theta and squared, right?

Because each sub problem is that code, right, they're just executed by itself is constant, right? But then there's theta and squared sub problems. So if you actually implemented the code and you ran it and was 100, how long would you wait for this code to complete? What's missing here? The cache, right? There's recursion here, but no memoization.

So this is exponential complexity. You'll recur. In fact, the recurrence for that is something like t of n equals 1 if n equals 1, and 2t n minus 1 if n is greater than 1. And this would be 2 raised to the n minus 1 in complexity. Now, there is a single line of code, and you all know this, that would fix this. And that single line of code is simply something that says right here, look at the L i j.

And I'm calling this a 2d array now, right? That's why we have our open brackets and closed brackets. So I'm overloading L here, but it's a 2d array that's essentially going to be a cache for the sub problem solution values. And then if you want to do the backtracking to actually compute the solution values, the solution, I guess, you could certainly have that as an additional record that's connected to this very same value, but that's implementation. We're not going there right now. So look at L i j and don't recurse if L i j already computed case.

That's important to remember. Now, if you actually put that the cache lookup, the hash table lookup, array lookup, then that is correct. So our formula for computing the complexity of a dynamic program that you've seen a bunch of times, and I mentioned the first lecture as well, first lecture of dynamic programming, is the number of sub problems times time to solve each sub problem, assuming or given that smaller ones are solved in the lookup of order one, right? So now you can say that hash table lookup is order one on average, right? So what actually happens in the worst case is this particular case in most DPs, you can do things like perfect caching or something that's even simpler in this case is just a 2d array, right? There's not going to be any collisions if you just use i and j as indices on the array.

So you'll definitely get an order one lookup in this case and in most problems that we will look at. So if we just do that computation, you do get your theta n squared because you have theta n squared sub problems, and the time to solve each sub problem given that the smaller ones are solved is simply going to be computation of a max and an addition. So all of that is theta one because you're not counting the recursive calls. So that is our first example. Okay, we're going to do another example. This is again a little bit different from the examples of dynamic programming.

We've looked that up until now because it's a game and you have an opponent and you have to figure out what the opponent is going to do to try to win, right? I suppose you could try to lose as well, but let's assume here, same thing with minimum and maximum, most of the time you can invert those these cost functions and dynamic programming will still work. But let's assume here that you want to win this game. So the game is an alternating coin game where we have a row of n coins of values vi through vn, v1, sorry, through vn. These are not necessarily in any particular order and n is even and the goal here is select the outer coin. So select either the first or last coin from the row and then the opponent plays, remove permanently, but add it to your value and you receive the value.

Okay, so you and I are going to play together and we're going to be really fair. We're going to flip a coin to decide whether I go first, I get to pick heads or tails or I get to pick whether you go first. Actually, and because if I win, I could let you go if I wanted to, but I get to choose. So I guess it's sort of not too fair of a coin since obviously I'm going to win the flip. So I win the flip, I choose, I choose you go first and you pick six. Okay, so now I get to choose either 25 or four and I think I will take 25.

So your turn again, you choose 19 now. Okay, then I'll choose four. Okay, you choose 42 and then I'll end by choosing 39. Okay, now we get to add up the totals and see the outcome. No offense is intended to us as the players, but that was a classic example of how not to play this game. Okay, first off, I could have won regardless of the coins that were up there, regardless of the values of the coins if I'd have chosen to go first.

Okay, so this game, the person who goes first is guaranteed to not lose and by that, I mean, you may have a situation where you can tie in terms of the values, but you're guaranteed to not lose. Okay, now I ended up winning anyway because there were errors made during this. We don't have time to enumerate all of them, but yeah, this was just an intro here to this game. So we weren't trying to play strategy. So we're just going to move on and do the right thing now. So let me first tell you outside of dynamic programming, just in case you play this game over spring break or fall break or something, how you can win this game without having to compute complicated recursive memoization dynamic programs for this case.

So let's say I have v1, v2, v3 all the way up to vn minus one and vn and remember n is even. So you've got to pick n over two coins if you're the first player and n over two coins if you're the second player. So what the first player does is simply compute v1, take the odd numbers and n is even. So you've got vn minus one being odd, compute v1 plus v3 all the way to vn minus one and compare that with the even positions v2 plus v4 all the way to vn. So in this particular instance, I went second and if I just look at the odd positions, which is in fact what I ended up picking, it was let's come back, I think it was four. Yeah, so it was four plus 39 plus 25, which was 68.

So you can do this computation beforehand. You can compute this to be 68 in our case and compare that with 67 and you don't give up your first player advantage. So you're going to be with the first player, right? But now you say, I know that I can set this up so I always have a chance to get v1, v3, v5, etc. Because let's just say that the first player started first and player one decided in this case that the odd values are the ones for the win. So let's say player one picks v1 and at this point player two sees v2 through vn.

So you're just looking at that. Now player two could either pick v2 or they could pick vn. In that case, player one could pick v3 or vn minus one and stick with his rule of picking the odd coin. So regardless of what player two does, the first player could pick odd if odd was the way to go or if the values were such that even were the way to go, he could go even. So no reason for the first player to lose, right? So now let's say you just want to press your opponent.

You want to make sure that they never want to play you in this game again. Now you have a maximization problem. So this is clearly not dynamic programming. You don't need dynamic programming to add up a bunch of numbers. But let's say that you want to, given a set of coins, v1 through vn, you want a dynamic strategy that gives you the maximum value. This here odd versus even is a bit constraining because you're stuck to those positions and it's good to be in the situation if you just want to win and you don't care how to win.

But if you want to maximize, then it's a more complicated problem. And so let's talk about how you would do something like that. We, yeah, so maybe it would be v1 and v4 and something else depends on the values. How would you get to a situation if you're the first player? We'll just stick with that. You're the first player.

You know you can't lose using this strategy, but not only do you not want to lose, you want to get as many coins as possible. Let's say this is money, right? That's our goal. A little trick here with I guess a greedy algorithm you can think of or it's not really even something that you might want to call an algorithm. It's just a little computation. And our goal now is to maximize the amount of money when assuming your first move.

And so this is going to be a little bit different from all the other problems that we've looked at because now we have to think about what's our opponent going to do? What does that look like? And there's going to be a sequence of moves here. You're going to move first, so that one's easy. You've got the whole problem. But now you have to say the opponent is going to move and pick a coin.

And then you have to think about your sub problem as the potential rows of coins that are going to be different depending on what the opponent does. And through this process, you have to maximize the value. So it's really pretty different from the examples that we've looked at this far. So we are going to have to do a little bit of setup before we get to our dynamic program. And so it's not super complicated. And part of this is going to kind of look like the previous problems that we've looked at.

So Vij is the max value. We can definitely win if that's our turn. And only coins V i through V j remain. And so next we have V i i. There's only one coin left and you just pick i. Now you might say that it's never going to happen if there's an even number of coins and I'm playing first because the other player is going to be at the end.

It's going to be the person who picks the last coin, right? But we need to categorize V i i because we need to model what the other player is going to do. So we can't just say that we're going to be looking at an even number of coins in terms of the row of coins you look at, which is true that when you move on, you only see an even number of coins if you're the first player. But you do have to model what the opponent does. Okay, so we need V i i. And what you might see of course is that the board looks like V i i plus one for some arbitrary i.

So that's that's why we've got this on the slide. But remember that you're only picking coins on the outside. So it's not like you're going to have a gap. I mean, you're not going to have V three left and V seven left, right? There's no way that's going to happen. You're just going to keep shrinking taking things from either the left or the right.

So it's going to be i and i plus one. Okay. And so in this case, why would you pick V i and i plus one? You just pick the max because at the end of this, either you did it right or you did it wrong. Either way, you're going to improve your situation by picking the max of V i or V i plus one. So there's anyway, yeah.

So so here you're going to pick the maximum of the two and you might have V i i plus two, which is an odd number of coins that the opponent might see. It gets more complicated for V i and i plus two. We now have to start thinking in more general terms as to the different moves, what the different moves are, but we've got the base cases here. Okay. All I did was take care of the base cases or a couple base cases associated with a single coin, which is what your opponent will see and pick or two coins, which is your last move. Okay.

So with dynamic programming, of course, you always have to go down to your base case and that's when things become easier. So we have to talk about two things to put up our to put our recurrence together. The two things we have to talk about are what you do when you move. And that's actually fairly easy. And the second thing we need to model is what the opponent looks like when you're waiting for him or her to move. So let's take a look at your move.

And I've got a V i, then the, I'm sorry, V one, then V i, V j dot dot dot V n. So that's what you see. And you're looking at i and j. And at this point, you're seeing all those other coins, the outer coins have disappeared into people's pockets, right? And you're looking at this interval. Okay.

So let's look at what V i, j should be and keep in mind that we want to maximize the amount of money. And what we and what we want to say that you should be able to definitely win this amount of money, regardless of what the opponent does, right? So I want to do max. And I have two choices here, I can pick V i or I can pick V j. So it's, it's not like there's a lot of choices here. So if I pick V i, then let me go ahead and say I pick V i on the left and on the right, I pick V j.

So, so those are the two arguments to my max, right? So I'm going to have a V i plus one at the end on the left. And I'm going to have a plus V j on the right, because I picked the appropriate value. And now this is also not too crazy, right? What what happens? V i plus one to j.

So the range becomes i plus one j. I have to be a little careful here in terms of whether I can argue that it's actually the V that I put in here. So the subtlety here is simply that, that the V i plus one j is not something that I see in front of me, right? That's the complication. V i plus one j is never a board that I see in front of me, whereas V i j, that was a board that I saw in front of me, right? So I have to model the boards, the coins boards that I see in front of me, because those are the boards I have control over that I can maximize.

And I, yeah, so I don't know quite what that is, because of what I get eventually is not something I can control, okay? It's going to be, it's going to be there after my opponent has, has moved, okay? That's what that's what it's going to be. So all I'm going to do is I'm going to say the range becomes i plus one j on the left and the right side is i j minus one. And in both of these cases, the opponent moves. So in order to actually write out my dynamic program, I'm going to have to now look at the worst case situation in terms of the board I get back, because the only times I'm adding values is when I see the board in front of me and I pick a coin.

I'm not going to have to say now the opponent is going to see an i plus one j or an i j minus one, excuse me, and, and might do something. I'm going to, I'm going to get something back. I'm going to assume that the opponent is just as smart as I am knows dynamic programming has taken 381. And I still want to get the maximum value that I can definitely win. Okay. So we need to look inside of that a little bit.

And we are going to make an assumption, which is the opponent is going to, I mean, not necessarily do the right thing, I guess, but you have to assume that the opponent knows just as much as you do. And it's going to try to do as well as possible. Okay. So that's the last thing we have to do here. It's just one more equation. So here's the solution.

We now have the i plus one j sub problem with the opponent picking. And the simple observation is that we guarantee we're guaranteed the min of vi plus one j minus one or vi plus two j. And the first case, the opponent picks vj. And in the second case, the opponent picks vi plus one, and you're guaranteed the minimum of these two, because the opponent can only pick one coin. So that's the simple observation that lets you jump ahead on your next move, which is really what the dynamic program is interested in, because that's the only time that you're actually executing something in terms of picking coins from the board, and then adding to your value. But we did have to model that as to what the maximum value was you could win jumping ahead on this move.

And you have the min in here, because you're assuming that this is a definite guarantee. That's what we want. It's possible that the opponent plays a different game from the one we think he or she is going to play, which maximizes his or her value. But the minimum is guaranteed. So now that you've made this observation, it turns out we just have to take that and we'll be done. So last set of equations, just plugging in the observation that that we just had.

So we have vij equals max. This is the outer max that I had up on the slide already. So that's the same max, okay, and I put these giant brackets in here. And inside, we're going to plug in the min, which is something that corresponds to the value that I would win in the worst case after the opponent plays the best possible move. And that would be vi plus one j minus one vi plus two j plus vi. This vi is also the same as the one before.

And you've got a plus vj here. And I didn't actually do this, but in terms of writing out what the opponent would do in the other sub problem case, it's, it's, you have a problem that corresponds to the ij minus one problem. And the opponent could pick the ith or could pick the jj minus one. If the opponent picks the j minus one, you get vij minus two. And you need to take the min of that. In the other case where the opponent picks i in which you get i plus one j minus one.

And so that is actually our dynamic program. So the big difference here was modeling that you had to do something in the middle, right? We didn't actually have to do any of that in our dynamic programs that we've covered in 381, at least up until this point. So with any of these problems, the complexities are decently straightforward to compute. The complexity here is simply again, as before, the number of sub problems times the time it takes to solve that sub problem. So you can see here that all the constraints, the, all of these are constant time operations.

So assuming that the vij's have been computed, it's theta one time to compute a sub problem. So that's your theta one. And as before, there are theta n, there's n squared, I guess, sub problems. So the number of sub problems times theta one is just theta n squared. Okay. So that was good.

Hopefully it's helpful to see another example of some dynamic programming stuff. And I'll see you guys next time.