You have started screen share. Okay, I'm going to fix that. Okay. Okay, today we are going to cover a different kind of tree like data structure called a heap, a binary heap. So, we are going to let us solve sorting problems in a new way. And let's first.

Okay. So the problem we're going to be solving today is called priority queue. This is the interface. We're going to see several data structures, but one main data structure for today. And this is a subset of the set interface. And subsets are interesting because potentially we can solve them better, faster, simpler, something.

And so you'll recognize, you should recognize all of these operations except we didn't normally highlight the max operation. So here we're interested in sorting a bunch of items. They have keys, which we think of as priorities. And we want to be able to identify the maximum priority item in our set and remove it. And so there's lots of motivations for this. Maybe you have a router packets going into the router and they're, they have different priorities assigned to them.

You want the, you want to route the highest priority first. Or you have processes on your computer trying, trying to run on your single threaded single core and now you've got to choose which one to run next. And usually you usually run, run higher priority processes first. Or you're trying to maybe simply a system where events happen at different times and you want to process the, the next event ordered by time. All of these are examples of the priority queue interface. We'll even see applications with within this class.

And we'll see that when we get to graph algorithms, but the main two things that we want to be able to support are, are inserting an item, which includes a key and, and leading the maximum item and also returning it at the same time. We'll also talk about, we'll talk some about being able to build the structure faster than just inserting it. But of course we could implement build by, by starting empty and repeatedly inserting. So the complexity of just the, of just finding the max without deleting it. This you could simulate with these two operations by deleting max and then reinserting it, which works, but often we can do it faster right, but, but the, the two key main operations are insert and delete max and we're going to see a few data structures to do this. What should we use to solve priority queue interface.

Many possible answers here. So set set AVL right set AVL supports these operations, many more, all in log and time except for build which takes and log in time, because you have to sort it first right. So set AVL a good way is a good way to do this. This gets log in for operations and set AVL is our most powerful data structure here it does all the operations we care about on the set side. So great if we wanted to, for example, speed up. So if we wanted to find max in a set AVL, we could add augmentation, we could remember subtree property augmentations we can use that to get constant time find, find max by storing in every node the maximum key item within that and that's a subtree property it's one we mentioned last class.

So we could even improve that to cut some time. Right, great. So we're done right and end of lecture in some sense that's in some sense that's true. But what we're going to see today is another data structure called a binary heap which is in some sense a simplification of set AVL. It achieves basically the same time bounce build will be faster by by a log factor. But that's not the main reason we care about them the main advantage is that they are simpler, and they've given us an in place sorting algorithm.

So, so I have up here three of the operations. So what we're talking about we, we have build build insert and delete max so we have set AVL trees there and log in build log and insert log and delete. So along the way to our heap I want to mention two other data structures. One is a dynamic but unsorted array, and the other is a dynamic sorted array. So these are simpler data structures we've talked about many times before, and they're useful, the kind of motivations for getting started, because a heap is going to be built on top of arrays. What will sort of a fusion between arrays and trees.

So if I have an unsorted array this is very easy to insert into right I just append to the end this this is what we call insert last. So the first array that we're going to be using here is is fast constant amortized. We might have to resize the array but that's but so so that's that's the amortized part, but delete max is slow and an unsorted array I don't know where the max is right so so I have to scan through the array. So I scan through the array identify that the max is somewhere in the middle and then if I want to delete it, I want to to delete that maximum element well in a dynamic array. All I can really do is delete the last element, officially. So I could, for example, swap it with the last element and then delete the last element in the array which is pop in in Python delete that delete underscore last in in our world.

So overall this is linear time, which is bad. But I want to highlight exactly how it's done for a reason we'll get into in a moment. So the sorted array is sort of the reverse it's very easy to find the max, where is it at the end right, delete underscore max. The max element is always the last element in an increasing sorted array. So that's constant amortize, because then I have to delete it which may incur resizing insert though is going to be linear because maybe I can binary search to find where the added items belong item item belongs. But then I'm going to have to do a big shift.

So I might as well just swap repeatedly until I find the position where item x belongs, and that takes linear time which is bad. So we want to somehow. We want somehow the best of these two worlds insert is fast for array, delete is fast for a sorted array. We can't get constant time for both but we can get log and time for both we already know how with set ABL trees, but we're going to see a different way to do it today. And the main motivation for a different way to do this is is sorting so I want to define a priority queue sort. So, so given any data structure that implements a priority queue interface in particular insert and delete max.

So what do I do, insert all the items, delete all the items, but because when I delete them they come out largest first, I get them in a reverse sorted order. Then I could in that then I could reverse in linear time and, and I've sorted my items, right. So we can insert x for for x in a or or build a and then repeatedly delete max and how much time does this I wrote and take. I'm going to introduce some notation here it takes however long it takes to build an items we're going to call that we're going to call that T sub T sub build and plus sorry plus n times the time to do a delete max, or we can write this as n times time to do an insert plus time to do a delete max. I'm using these T functions to just abstract what are are the running times provided by my data structure that implements this interface interface says what's correct is, and and these T functions, give me my performance bounds so if I plug in each of our data structures, I get an Avalos sorting algorithm I get AVL sort I get a race or I get, I get sorted array sort. What do these look like.

It turns out many of these are familiar so set AVLs take log n per operation. I get an n log n sorting algorithm out of all of them out of them which which is insert all of the items into the AVL tree. I don't want to use AVL build because that uses sort and and not allowed to sort in order to implement sort right, but we saw how to insert into an AVL tree and keep that thing balanced. So so that takes log n each, and then we can find the max delete it and rebalance and so on so total time will be and log in. So here. So, this, this is a complicated algorithm.

We call we call AVL sort. It's a bit complicated because AVL trees are a bit complicated to be to be honest, but it gives us optimal comparison bound by log n. Now what about a race sort. So, so I suppose. So I so suppose we're using an unsorted array here, I insert the item so if I insert these items. I'm doing all the insertions before all the deletions what's going to happen is I just insert the items in the original array order.

In other words, I just take the array and then what I do is repeatedly extract the maximum item by searching for it, moving it to the end of the array and then repeating that process. Does that sound familiar hopefully it does that was that was lecture three that was selection sort. So so this that array gives us selection sort. I should say, and this is a new way to think about what we're doing back then was a sorted array. What are we doing we we insert all the items that's actually where where all the work happens because we maintain the sorted array. So we start with an empty rate it's it's sorted we add an item.

Okay, it's still sorted. We had a second item and we swap if we need to in order to sort. In general, when we add an item we swap it to the left until it's sorted again. That's insertion sort. So, so kind of cool this is this is a unifying framework for three sorting algorithms that we've seen before. We didn't actually talk about a BL sort last time but but I'll put it up in some notes.

And so so that is the right part of this table right. So, so of course these array data structures are are not efficient they take linear time for some of the operations. So the sorting algorithms are not efficient. But they're the ones we've seen before so it's neat to see how they fit in here in the table shown in the slides. Selection sort and insertion sort had the advantage that they were in place you just needed a constant number of pointers or indices beyond the array itself. So they're they're very space efficient.

So that'll be plus for them, but they take n squared times you should never use them except for like, and 100 maybe or something. So AVL tree sort is great and and then it gets and log in time probably more complicated than merge sort and so we can just stick to merge sort, but neither merge sort nor set AVL tree sort are in place. And so the goal of today is to get the best of all worlds and sorting to get and log in comparisons, which is optimal in the comparison model. But, but to get it in place. And that's what we're going to do with with binary heaps. We're going to design a data structure that happens to build a little bit faster as I mentioned, linear time building.

So it's not representing a sorted order in the same way that AVL trees are, but it will, it will be kind of tree based it will also be kind of array based. So we're going to get logarithmic time for insert and delete max, it happens to be amortized because we're using arrays. But the key thing is that it's an in place data structure it only consists of an array of items. And so when we plug it into our sorting algorithm, priority queue sort or generic sorting algorithm not only do we get and log in performance, but we also get an in place sorting algorithm this will be our first and only to to this class and log in in place sorting algorithm. Okay. So that's the goal let's let's do this so what we're going to do, because we're in place basically we have an array storing storing our end items that's that's sort of the definition of in place.

Just using n sorts of memory, exactly the size of the number of items in our structure. But we're obviously not going to use regular array, regular unsorted array or regular sorted array. We're going to use array just just as sort of the underlying technology for how things are stored. So we're going to use a log like logarithmic performance which hopefully should make you think of a tree. The only way to get a log is is the binary tree more or less so somehow we want to embed a tree into an array. Let's look at an example here.

Okay, let's look at this tree so so if I got to choose any old tree I want, I would choose a tree that's basically perfectly balanced perfectly balanced would would would be like this right. What's what's the property that that I have all of these levels all of those depths are completely filled with notes a is at depth zero BC depth one def G depth two and then H I J is is depth three of course. So what I really like to have. I'd like to have two to the eye nodes at depth I right that would be our perfect binary tree, but that only works when and is one less than a power of two right I can't always achieve that for any end. And so the next best thing I could hope for is two to the I nodes at depth I until our very last I the largest depth. At that level, I'm still going to restrict things I'm I'm going to force all of the nodes to be as far left as possible.

So I want to say except at max depth where the nodes are all let's call them like left justified. And these two properties together that's what we call a complete binary tree. Why is this interesting, because I can claim I represent a tree like this as an array. I can narrowed things down enough that I can draw the array right shown shown down at the bottom here. And what I'm going to do is write those nodes in in depth order. So I write a first because that's step zero then then BC that's that's that's step one.

Well, they're alphabetical. I made it that way. So D F G depth to then H I J depth three. Very different from traversal order of a tree traversal order would have been a H, H, D, I be J, E, A, F, C, G. Okay. But this, this is what we might call depth order do do lowest depth nodes first very different way to lay things out or to linearize our data.

And this is what he is going to look like. So, um, so, so the cool thing. Let's see. Okay. So, um, So the cool thing is between complete binary trees and arrays is is a biject right for every array. There's a unique complete binary tree and for every complete binary tree there's a unique array.

Why, because, because the kid could the complete constraint forces every it forces my hand. There's only if I give you a number and there is one tree shape of size and right you just fill in the notes top down until you get to the last level, then you have to fill them in left to right it's what you might call reading order for writing down notes and the array is telling you which keys go where. This is. Let's go back here. Um, so this is the first node you write down at the root. This is the next node right down at the left child of the real and so on.

And so here we have a binary tree represented as an array, or array representing the binary tree. Um, this is this the very specific binary tree it has a clear advantage which is is guaranteed balance no rotations necessary in heaps because complete binary trees are always balance in fact they they have the best height they possibly could, which is ceiling of log n balance remember just meant you were big O of log in. This is this is one times log in. So it's the best level of balance you could help for. So somehow I claim we we can maintain a complete binary tree for solving priority cues. This would not be possible if you were trying to solve the whole set interface.

Another cool thing about heaps is that by by just focusing on the subset of the set interface, we can do more. We can maintain this very, very strong property. And because we have this very strong property we we don't even need to store the street. We're not going to store the left and right pointers and parent pointers we're just going to store the array. This is what we call an implicit data structure. So we'll move here, which basically means no pointers just an array of the end items.

How how are we going to get away without storing pointers. I'd still I'd still like to treat it like a tree I'd still like to know the left child of B is D and the right child of B is E we'll see why in a moment. Well, we can do this with index arithmetic so maybe I should. Let's let's add some labels. So, so this array we've got indices we've got index zero 123456789 because they're 10 items so index zero through nine, and I can apply those labels to to our notes so so adding our depth order here I'm showing this in red. And once I have this labeling it's going to be a lot easier to figure things out so if I wanted to know the left child of B is D somehow given the number one.

I want to compute the number three add add to there are all sorts multiply by three they're all sorts of operations that that take one and turn it into three. So only one that's going to work. Excuse me in all cases. And the intuition here is, well I have two to the I nodes at level I, if I want to go to to the child level. There's two to the I plus one nodes down there exactly exactly double. And that's the last one but that won't really matter.

If there is a left child, it will behave the same. And so intuitively I have this big space of size to the I, I have to expand it to a to a space of size to the I plus one. So I should, I should multiply by two. And that's almost right but then there's some constants. So I'd like to say to say two times I but if we look at the examples. I forgot one times two is to which is less than three, two times two is for which is, which is less than five right.

And we're just off by one off off by one is index errors are the most common thing in computer science so what about the right child. If the left child is to I plus one where is the right child. Okay, so we're writing because we're writing things left to the right in depth order, the right child is the right sibling of the left child. So it's just one larger. Right. So given those rules we can also compute parent it's just whatever the inverse of both of those functions which, which I want to divide by two at some point.

I get to I given to I plus one, or given to I plus two. So if I subtract one from my, then I either get to I, or to I plus one. And then if I take an integer division by two, I get I the the original maybe. Let's call this J then. Okay, yeah. So let's call this this J to be more clear.

So if J is the left or the right child, then I can reconstruct I, which was the parent. So this is constant number arithmetic operations. I don't have to store left and right pointers, I can just compute them whenever I need them. Whenever I'm at some node like he and I want to know what it's left child. Sorry, the given the given the node index for which happens to contain the item E, and I want to know what it's left child is I just multiply by two and add one, I get nine, and then I can index it into this array at position nine, because I don't. Because this is just in my head remember we're, we're just thinking that there's a tree here but in reality on our computer there's there's just the array.

So if we want to go from E to J we can from four to nine. So if we try to go to the right child we multiply by by two. Eight add to 10. And we see oh 10 is beyond the end of the array but our array stores its size and so we realize, oh, he does not have a right child. This is something you can only do in a complete binary tree in a general binary tree you don't have these nice properties. So cool so this is basically it's basically a heap I just need to add one more property naturally called the heap property.

Here. Um, Okay, so multiple types of heaps this type is called a binary heap we'll talk about others in future lectures. We're going to call it q explicit thing this is an array representing a complete binary tree called the array queue. And we want every node to satisfy the so called max heap property which says q of i is greater than or equal to q of j for both children left of I and right of I. And we have node i, and it has two children to I plus one and two I plus two. Those are two values of J.

What we want is a greater than or equal relation, greater than or equal relation. So, so anyway that that node should be should be bigger. And then we're going to add a whole bunch of other nodes, which of them is larger we don't know we don't care. Very different from binary search trees or, or set binary trees, where we said these guys were less than or equal to this one this one is less than or equal to all the nodes in the subject year. We're just locally saying that this node is greater than or equal to this node and this node so so biggest is at the top. So one nice lemma about these heaps this is where let me give you some more intuition.

If you are a binary heap if you satisfy this max heap property everywhere, then in fact you learn that every node I is greater than or equal to all the nodes in its subtree. These are what we called descendants of of descendants in subtree of I. So if we're looking at this example. A here is is greater than or equal to both B and C, B is greater than or equal to D and E, and C is greater than or equal to F and G. D is greater than or equal to H and I, and E is greater than or equal to J. So what does this structure a heap, not just a complete binary tree.

So what does that imply it implies that a must be the maximum so. So you look at any note here like like J, a is greater than or equal to be is greater than or equal to E is greater than or equal to J. And in general what we're saying is that a is greater than or equal to all the nodes in the tree, B is greater than or equal to all the nodes in its subtree down there. That's what this lemma is saying. You can prove this lemma by by induction. But it's really simple if you have two nodes, let's show them here.

If you have two nodes, I and J and J is somewhere in the subtree that means there's some downward path from I to J. And you know that for every edge we traversed on a downward path, our key is going down non strictly. So every child is less than or equal to its parent. I is greater than or equal to to like tracing our little zigzag. I is greater than or equal to to this is greater than or equal to this is greater than or equal to J. So by transitivity of less than or equal to you know that I is in fact greater than or equal to to J.

Or sorry, the key and I is greater than or equal to the key in J. Very different way to organize keys in a tree but as you might imagine this is going to be good for priority cues. Because priority cues just need to find maximum elements, then they need to delete it and that's going to be harder because leading the root is that that's the hardest node to to delete intuitively right deleting the root. I really prefer to delete leaves right, but deleting leaves and keeping a complete binary tree is actually kind of hard. If I want to delete H. It doesn't look like a binary tree or it doesn't look like a complete binary tree anymore.

It's, it's not left justified. Similarly, if I want to delete F that's bad because now I don't have four nodes there the, the one node that's easy to delete is J right if I remove that node, I still have a complete tree. The last leaf the last position in my array is the one that's that's easy to delete and that's good because arrays are good at deleting the last item. But what I've, what I've set up here is it's easy to find the max, it's going to be about the root deleting is annoying and I'd like to somehow take that key and put it at a position at the last position at the last leaf. That's the one that's easy to delete and that's indeed what we're trying to do in a delete algorithm. Let's first do insert here.

I guess, yeah, so that's a little similar kind of symmetric to to what we just did so. So if I want to insert a key or an item X, which has some key. Again, the only thing I can really do in an array if I want to add a new item is to add it to the end it has to go at the end. The only thing we know how to do is insert at the end of an array. This is what we called in insert last. So of course wants to to adding a node containing X the item X in the very last level of the complete binary tree, either it goes to the right of all the existing nodes, or it starts a new level but it's always going to be the last leaf.

After we do the insertion, it will be at position q minus one, right. So that's probably not enough though we we just inserted an arbitrary item in a leaf and now it may not satisfy that max heap property anymore so let's check if it does and if it doesn't fix it that's what we know how to do. But this time we're not even going to be rotations which is cool. We're going to find an operation called max heap of fi up this will make things more like a max heap. We're going to start at size of q minus one for our value I, but it's going to be recursive so what we're going to do is look at node I, in particular the one that just got inserted and and where could it violate things. Think about this for a second.

Where could it violate things. It's parent right because we have no idea what key we just put there maybe it's less than our parent them, then we're happy but if it's greater than our parent we're in trouble and we need to fix it. So if the item in the keys parent is less than eyes key. This is if the parent is smaller than the child. We wanted the parent to always be greater than or equal to its children so in that case what can we do, we swap them right let's we swap. We have a key parent of I with Q of I.

Now they're in the right order. Now we need to think about what about the other child of that node what about its parents so I have some numbers here. Let's say we've got five and this is 10. What do I know what did I, what did I know about this picture before right so we had, we were here. Now we're here. Well I know that 10 is this newly inserted item.

It's, it's the only one that could have caused violations when we first inserted it. So I know that before this before I moved 10 around I knew all the things in the left subtree are less than or equal to five and everything up here at the top are greater than or equal to five. And I also know that the nodes in the right subtree in fact were less than or equal to five other than that this note 10 that we just inserted that that was a correct heap. So five was a separator between things above it on on an ancestor chain are greater than or equal to five and things in its subtree are less than or equal to it so after I do this swap, which which I'm just going to do after I swap. The items five and 10. Let's do that.

So, so now I realize okay great the the edge between 10 and five is happy because now 10 is greater than or equal to five. But also our left edge is happy because because it used to be happy and we only made its parent larger. Now the top edge maybe as bad so so maybe we need to recurse, recurse on on the parent but that's it so we fixed the right edge. Initially this happens way down at the leaf but in general we're taking our item that we inserted which is X. And it starts at the last leaf and it maybe bubbles up for a while, and then it gets all the way to the root. So we only inserted a new maximum item, but in each step it goes up by one.

And so the running time of all of this stuff is the height of the tree, which is log in. And because there's, because there's only this one item that could potentially be wrong it. If it ever stops moving we've just checked that it satisfies the max heap property. So the root, you can also check it satisfies the max heap property. So there's a base case, which I guess I didn't write in slides, which is, or did I? Okay, which is I equals zero.

If I equals zero were at the root, we're done right that's our base case and then you can prove this is correct by induction. So there's just one item that's in the wrong spot initially and we put it into the right spot. There are many places it could go, but we'll move it to, to the unique ancestor position that is correct that satisfies our max heap property. Okay, so that's insert. Delete then is going to be almost the same delete min. Sorry, delete max, I guess we did delete max.

Of course, you can define all these things for men instead of max it everything works the same you just, you can of course. Yeah, anyway, I just have her time remembering which one we're doing so don't don't switch. You can't just use a max heap to do delete min you can't use a men heap to do delete max, but you can use a men heap to do delete men. Okay, so, so like I said the only node we really know how to delete is the last leaf on the last level which is the end of the array, because that's what arrays can delete efficiently and what we need to do is, we need to delete, we need to delete the root item because that's always the maximum one, which is at the first position in the array so what do we do. We swap them right our usual trick. I think the cool thing about heaps is we never have to do rotations we're only going to do swaps which is something we, we had to do with trees also binary trees.

We're going to do it q zero. So, so we're going to swap q zero with q, the last item q of the last item I should say, and now we have the last item is the one we want to delete so so we do delete last or or pop in Python, and boom, we've got we we've now deleted the maximum of course we also may have messed up the max heap property just like we did with the insert right so with insert we were adding a last leaf now what we're doing is swapping the last leaf. We're swapping the last leaf with with J. Um, so the problem now is one and then we deleted that note right the problem now is that the root node has maybe a very small key because the key that's here now whatever was down before. Whatever. What am I trying to say.

Whatever was okay the key that's there now is whatever was down there, which is very low in the tree is all I'm trying to say. So intuitively that's that's a small value I guess is what I'm getting at. This is supposed to be the maximum value though, and and we just put a small value in the root so what do we do. It's called he verified down. We're going to take that item and somehow push it down the tree and down down in the tree until max heap property is satisfied. So this is going to be max heapify down.

And we will start it at position zero which is our route and max heapify down is going to be a recursive algorithm so we'll start at some position I, and initially that's the root. And what we're going to do is look at position I, and it's two children. So let's say we put a very small value up here like zero and let's say we have our children, five and 10. And so what what I like to do to fix this local picture. We want to swap right. And I could swap zero is clearly in the wrong spot needs to go lower in the tree, I can swap zero with five or zero with 10, which one.

I could draw the picture was five but it wouldn't be happy so why 10. We want to do it with the larger one because then both edges are happy if I swapped five up there instead the 510 edge would be unhappy it wouldn't satisfy the max heap property. So I can do one swap and fix max heap property except that again zero may be unhappy with its children zero zero was this one item that that was in the wrong spot and so it made it have to go even farther down but five, five didn't even move so it's happy everything in that subtree is good. So what about the parent well if you think about it because everything was a correct heap before we added zero or before we put zero to high, all of the ancestor nodes will be greater than or equal to 10 on the ancestor path, and all of the nodes were less than or equal to 10 before, unless you're equal to five so that's still true. But you see this that tree is happy. So the other tree might still be unhappy zero zero still might need to push down farther that's going to be the recursion.

So we check down here there's a there's a base case which is if I is a leaf. Because there's nothing below them so we satisfy the max heap property, I because there's no children. Otherwise, let's look at the leaf among the left among the two children left and right of I right if I might not exist then ignore it. But among the two children that exist find the one that has the max key value q of j dot key. That was 10 in our example. And then if these items are are out of order.

If we do not satisfy. So, so greater than would be would be satisfied less than then q of j would be the opposite of the max heap property here if max heap property is violated, then we fix it by swapping q of I with q of j, then we recurse on j call max heap of phi down of j. And that's it so pretty pretty symmetric insert was a little bit simpler because we only have one parent. Delete men because we're pushing down we have two children we have to pick one, but it's there but there's a clear choice the bigger one right. And again this algorithm this whole thing will take order each time. So we're going to go ahead and set the height of the tree which is log in because our node just sort of bubbles down.

And at some point it stops. When it stops we know the max heap property was satisfied there and if you check along the way by induction, all the other max heap properties will be satisfied because they were before. So, almost forced what we could do here the amazing thing is that you can actually maintain a complete binary tree that satisfies the max heap property but once you're told that the algorithm kind of falls out, because we have an array the only thing we can do is insert and delete the last item. So we can swap things to to their order. Or out of there in order to make that work. And then, then the rest is just checking locally that you can fix the property.

Right. Okay, so that's almost it not quite what we wanted so now we have log n amortize. And delete max in our heap we did not yet cover linear build right now it's and log n. If you insert and times, and we we did not yet cover how to make this an in place sorting algorithm so if we sketch those out. Okay, so how do we make this algorithm in place. So we want to follow priority queue sort but I don't want to have to grow and shrink my array I would just like to start with the array itself so this is in place as shown.

So what I want to do is say okay here's my array that I want to sort this that's given to me that's the input to priority queue sort and what I'd like to do is to build a priority queue out of it initially that's empty. And then I want to insert the items one at a time, let's say. So in general, what I'm going to do is maintain a queue that that queue is some prefix of a. That's going to be my priority queue it's going to live in this the sub array we're calling it. Um, so how do I insert a new item. Well I just increment.

So to do an insert the first step is to increment size of queue, then I will have taken the the next item from a and injected it into our queue. And conveniently if we look back at our insert code in the earlier slides the first thing we wanted to do was add an item at the end of our race so we just did it without any actual work just just conceptual work we we just said oh our queue is one bigger boom. Now this is at the end of the array no more amortization in fact, because we're not ever resizing our array we're just saying oh now queue is a little bit bigger of a prefix it just absorbed the next item of a. Similarly, delete max is is going to at the end decrement the size of queue. Why is that okay because at the end of our delete max operation, I guess not quite at the end but almost the end, we deleted the last item from our race so we just we just replaced the delete last with a with a decrement, and that's going to shrink the queue by one it has the exact same impact as leading the last item deleting last item. But now it's constant time, worst case not amortized.

And the result is we never actually build a dynamic rate we just use a portion of a to do it so what's going to happen is we're going to absorb all the items into the priority queue, and then start kicking them out and as we kick them out we kick out the largest key item first, and we put it in there, and then the next largest and then the next largest and so on. The minimum item is going to to be right here. And and boom it sorted, and this is the whole reason I did max heaps instead of men heaps is that in the end. This will be an upward sorted array with the max at the end because we always kick out items at the end we delete the max first. So it's so that's what's normally called heaps sort, and you can you can apply the same trick to insertion sort and selection sort, and you actually get the the insertion sort and selection sort algorithms that we've seen, which operate in prefixes of the array. Cool so so we've achieved our main goal, keep sort.

And next time we're going to talk about you have stopped screen share breath first search. Get cool.