Okay, so part two of our two extra sequence on network flow. So all the pain involved in the concepts and notation from last time is going to hopefully turn into some algorithmic fun today, but we will do a little bit of review just to make sure that we're all on the same page with respect to the notations that we talked about on flow networks. So recall that a flow network is simply a directed graph GVE and that each edge is going to have two numbers associated with it. Okay, we've got flow and capacity. We have a basic constraint associated with the flow not exceeding the capacity on any given edge. And we also have laws of conservation that say that other than the sink and the source, which are the two distinguished vertices in GVE, you're going to have a situation where for any intermediate vertex, all of the flow entering that vertex has to leave that vertex.

And with those two constraints, you need to find the max flow in your flow network. The flow value corresponding to this potential potential max flow or some flow is F equaling F of S of V and S is the source V corresponds to all other vertices. Okay, so you're looking at pushing flow from the source vertex to any of the vertices. And thus the V includes T as well. And this is essentially a flow value and we showed this is implicit summation notation. We showed using a little bit of algebra that that equals F of V T and that's going to hold because of flow conservation primarily.

So that was not particularly surprising, right? Something that was a little bit more surprising or is a little bit more surprising is that you can have an arbitrary cut in the flow network and a cut corresponds to any partition S, T such that little s belongs to big S, the source belongs to S and the sink belongs to T and that's essentially a cut. And so obviously there could be exponentially many cuts in a given flow network. But the amazing thing is that you can show a lemma that says regardless of what the actual flow values are in any of these edges across any cut, you're going to see this flow. And this is true for any cut S, T. The corollary to this lemma is that the flow is going to be less than or equal to the capacity of any cut.

And that simply comes from the edge constraints. You know that the flow value corresponding to any particular edge has to be less than the capacity of that edge. So you obey that constraint and you just look at the edges that go from S to T, sum up those capacities and your maximum flow or any flow is bounded by that capacity. And that's our C, S, T, right? So now you have a relationship between the minimum capacity cut and the max flow. We didn't actually exploit that in the sense of the algorithm itself, the operation of that algorithm.

But we're going to actually exploit the notation of a cut when we prove this algorithm that I got to late last lecture that corresponds to the forward focus in algorithm, right? I showed you the execution of it in order to prove that it's correct. We're going to need this notation of that bound on the flow value given any cut in the network. So the max flow related to min cut, okay? But before we get to that, just to catch you up on the algorithm that we actually got to, the forward focus in algorithm, that was based on the notion of a residual cut. This is now a new graph, GF, which is VEF.

So it depends on the flow. You compute it based on G, based on the given flow F. And this graph has edges that have strictly positive residual capacities, which are defined as CFUV equals CUV minus FUV. And this needs to be strictly greater than zero in order for the edge to exist in G of F, okay? So if that's zero, then you don't have an edge between U and V in G of F. If it's one or greater, assuming integral flow values, you will.

And there was a graph, two more quick definitions. One of what you saw last time and another that I just verbalized is the notation of an augmenting path. And this is any path from S to T in GF. So if there's a path from S to T in GF, you do not have a maximum flow. There's an augmenting path. You're going to be able to increase the flow corresponding to the F value that gave you your residual network G of F.

And how much can you increase this flow by? How much can you increase F by? Last termed the residual capacity. And the residual capacity of an augmenting path is simply CF of P. That's what we're going to call it. CF of P equals the minimum value of the residual capacities along the path, okay?

This would be CFUV and that's pretty much it. Some examples will hopefully make this more clear. If we look at what the actual algorithm is and go through a simpler example than we did last time, it'll give you a sense of how augmentations are going to change the flow. How augmenting paths appear and eventually disappear as the flow increases and reaches the maximum flow. So this simply corresponds to, as I said, walking through the augmenting path, looking at each of the residual capacities and picking the min value, okay? So the Ford-Fulgerson algorithm, which is the first algorithm for max flow, continues to be used, right?

Sets the flow on each of the edges to be zero. So you just set everything to zero, clearly satisfies the flow conservation, satisfies all the edge capacities. And you have literally three lines of code here while an augmenting path in GF exists. So there's not a lot going on here. You have to compute G of F. I mean, three lines of code, but the subroutines calls, which are fairly complicated, you have to compute G of F given F and initially it's all zeros.

And then eventually it's going to change or immediately after you discover an augmenting path, right? And now you've discovered an augmenting path. So you have to now do either breadth first search or depth first search in order to discover whether this is a path from S to T because that's the definition of an augmenting path. And then the last line of code says augment F by CF of P. And again, this is fairly involved. You have to take the path in G of F.

You're going to increase the values of that edge that correspond to G of F, G of F, translating those edges back to G. And there's a possibility and inversion in direction that is associated with that translation, right? So we've got to approve. So how is it that we know given all this? It's not because I told you that when we're converged, when we get out of this while loop that we have the max flow, right? Looks pretty good.

So now we have to sort of take all the notations that we've talked about here, including the including primarily the notation, the notion of cuts and the proof, the max flow min cut theorem, which is going to show this key result that we require, which is that when we terminate in the Ford-Fulgerson algorithm, we're going to have a max flow. And that's the reason why it's a max flow algorithm. If you don't have that proof, you don't have max flow algorithm. So let's look at the max flow min cut theorem, which I mentioned it last time, but never really got to stating. Today, we're going to state it and prove it. So this is an interesting theorem.

It says three things. F equals CST for some cut ST. This says that some cut is saturated, right? So that's just a statement. The second statement, which is equivalent to the first one says that F is a maximum flow. So F being a maximum flow means there's some cut that's saturated.

If there's some cut that's saturated for a given flow, you have max flow. And the last one, which is important for our Ford-Fulgerson algorithm is that F admits no augmenting pass. And so if I want to show that the Ford-Fulgerson algorithm terminates with a max flow based on implications like I implies J for numbers I and J, what do we need to prove? We're going to prove a bunch of things along the way. But crucially, what is the I implies J that I want to prove if I want to claim that the Ford-Fulgerson algorithm terminates with max flow? We need to do three implies two.

Right now, of course, that theorem says one implies two, two implies three, three implies one, et cetera. There's a lot of implications here. What we're going to do is we're going to show that one implies two, two implies three, three implies one. And that pretty much takes care of everything. So I want to show one implies two. And essentially what I want to say here is if I've saturated a particular cut's capacity, then I have a max flow.

And really, I mean, this comes from definitions, since I'm going to have F less than or equal to the CST. And this is simply because of edge capacity constraints. This is just an edge for any cut ST. The assumptions that F equals C of ST implies that F is a maximum flow because F can be increased. And that's basically it. So relatively easy.

Next one is easiest as well. Two implies three. If the rare and augmenting path, so I'm going to do this by contradiction. If the rare and augmenting path, the flow value can be increased because remember the augmenting path corresponds to a path with strictly positive residual capacities. The only reason there's an edge in there is because you have a greater than zero residual capacity. So that means that the flow value could be increased by some small amount corresponding to CFUV.

And each of these quantities that are in here, I'm sorry, corresponding to min CFUV, that's a residual capacity. But you know that each of these capacities CFUV are strictly greater than zero. So the min clearly is strictly greater than zero. But it might be some tiny quantity, but it's greater than zero, right? Which means that the flow value could be increased contradicting the maximality of F. So a little proof by contradiction gives you two implies three.

So far so good. This is primarily based on the definition of augmenting paths, residual capacities. Now the fun starts. Now what we want to do is three implies one. And that's going to take care of what we want. And we're going to say, suppose F admits no augmenting path.

So what does that mean? Well, that means you can't reach T from S. If you reach T from S, then there's an augmenting path. So you can't make that move or make that path. So let's go ahead and sort of look at this a little more carefully and figure out what's causing this lack of connectivity. There's a lack of connectivity between S and T.

You can't actually get there. So there's like a chasm, right? There's a there's a gap. And what's causing that? What we're going to do is figure out what the cut of the partition is. That could be the reason why we have this lack of connectivity.

So we're going to define S, which is exactly going to be our S from our favorite ST cut definition. But bear with me just a second, because I will tell you what S is. There exists a path in GF from S to U. So what I'm doing is collecting the reachable vertices from F. And I know that I'm not going to have T, small T in this in this set, because F admits no augmenting path. So I can't possibly reach T from S.

Okay. But I can collect all the vertices that can be reached from S in this given G of F and put them all into cap S, okay? Put them all in S. And then my T definition is simply V minus S. And the key observation, which I have already made, but important to emphasize is that small T belongs to big T and small S belongs to big S. And therefore, ST is a cut.

It satisfies the definition of a cut. So we've set ourselves up. So moving to the diagram on the slide, cap S on the left, cap T on the right, right? I'm going to pick some vertex V that's in T and some vertex U that's in cap S. And I know there's a path shown as a dotted line because this is a path in G of F. We're actually going to move between G of F and G in this proof.

So that's the only hard part of this proof. The movement between G and G of F, right? The edges are different between G and G of F. So got to keep that in your mind here because we're going to make arguments about that. I know that all of the vertices that are on the left-hand side are reachable from S. So I just picked an arbitrary vertex U.

And I know there's a path in G of F because that's the way I defined it in, well, from S to U, right? I also know there's no path in G of F from U to V because if there was a path, V would be on the left side, correct? So there's clearly no path from U to V. That's why V is on the right. Let's say that I'm picking something where there's an edge in G, the original flow network from U to V. So the edge that's a solid arrow drawn here, the dark edge, is an edge between U and V in G.

And that edge has a certain capacity that existed. The reason it existed is because it had a non-zero capacity, right? But we originally defined our flow network to be something where if you only put edges in there in the original flow network, if the capacities were greater than zero, right? So that edge in there in G had some capacity, C, U, V, which was greater than zero. But this edge does not exist in G of F, correct? So what can I say?

I've got this edge here in the original graph and I didn't get a dotted line there because the residual capacity was zero. The original capacity was non-zero. The residual capacity is zero. Yeah, the original was non-zero. The only reason that happens is because C, F, U, V is zero since C, F, U, V is greater than zero. If it were greater than zero, then V would belong to S, not V belonging to T, as assumed.

So that's essentially what we've determined here. So this means that F of U, V equals C of U, V simply because F, C, I'm sorry, C, F, U, V equals C, U, V minus F, U, V, which is zero. Okay, so that's a statement I can make. Now, I didn't have any constraints on U and V. I just said U belongs to S and V belongs to T. And for each of those things, I know I can't have edges in the residual network between U and V, which means that any edge that exists, maybe there's no edge in the original network, but if there was an edge in that original network, it's saturated according to my argument, right?

So every edge from S to T in the original network is saturated, and that essentially means that I've gotten to the capacity of my cut. And that's what that means. If I've saturated every edge, I've reached the capacity, okay? So that's it. And once you recognize that you had an arbitrary choice of U and V, you just say, summing over all U belonging to S and V belonging to T yields F of cap ST equals C of cap ST. So F of XT equals C of ST.

That's exactly what we want. We're saying F of ST is obviously the cardinality of F. So that's why Ford-Folkerson algorithm works. It's because of the analysis that the Ford-Folkerson algorithm actually works. So are we done? What are we missing in this algorithm design?

Our algorithm analysis. We haven't done a complexity analysis, right? So what we have here is a weird flow network that has these strange capacities. It's a relatively straightforward flow network, but at the, as of the moment, it obviously satisfies a flow conservation because all the flows are zero and therefore edge capacities. But we're going to take a pathological execution of the Ford-Folkerson algorithm, which by the way did not specify how you are going to select the augmenting path. It just said find an augmenting path.

And in passing, I said overuse depth first search. We'll use breadth first search and kind of hand wave my way through that. Now it turns out you can't hand wave when you want to run algorithms, right? You eventually have to code them up. You've got to pick something. So people did, right?

People picked different ways of selecting augmenting paths in the Ford-Folkerson framework. And they discovered that some of them work beautifully and some of them would fail miserably on networks that were as small as this and they would just take forever. And this is before complexity analysis, kind of before asymptotic complexity really came into vogue. So they just had empirical analysis to tell them that some techniques for discovering augmenting paths work better than other techniques on an imperial basis, right? So what could go wrong with Ford-Folkerson on this example? What selection strategy corresponding to the augmenting path could cause Ford-Folkerson to have a huge number of iterations?

Look at this and think about what that could be. Each time you pick an augmenting path, you pick one that goes to the center, right? Computers are silly. And it's doing depth first search. It's producing these paths and you'll end up with two billion iterations for this, right? And how many iterations do you really need if you did it right?

Two, right? So that's a two billion factor slowdown. So this is a pathological example, a simple one just to show you what the problem is, right? But you can imagine that if you use depth first search, you might be able to, you might be like a factor of five slower on average than if you use some of the technique and a factor of five is nothing to be scoffed at, right? If you're running for minutes and back in the day, computers were horribly slow. So how is that problem fixed then?

Any number of ways. But the first real way is that took into account asymptotic complexity was Edmunds and Karp, which was a few years after Ford-Folkerson. And their contribution was not as much of a new algorithm, though it is called the Edmund Karp algorithm. It's just really a small change to the Ford-Folkerson. The Edmunds Karp algorithm slash analysis is that if you use a breadth first search augmenting path, I'm sorry, if you use a breadth first augmenting path, it's obviously just as easy to discover complexity-wise as the depth first path. Then you could get a polynomial bound that did not depend on the capacities for the complexity and therefore iteration count of Ford-Folkerson.

And so the breadth first path is the shortest path in GF from S to T if you count where each edge has weight one. So in that case, you would get your two iterations. You'd get the shortest path of weight two. Whenever I say weight, I just mean counting the number of edges here. And these algorithms, they actually recognize that the breadth first implementations of Ford-Folkerson were the ones that ran faster than all the other ones. And they said, wait, what's going on here?

This looks pretty good. And so they went off and did a fairly sophisticated analysis that showed that you only need order VE augmentations in the worst case. So this is what we know and love with respect to algorithmic complexity. Order VE augmentations in the worst case provided you use breadth first augmentation. And so what's the overall complexity of the algorithm? Let's call it the Edmunds Karp algorithm.

What is the breadth first search? It would be order VE squared. Yeah, VE squared. You could let's assume that E is greater than V. And so we could say order V squared as well. So that was the Edmunds and Karp contribution.

There's been amazing amounts of work in the past 30, 40 years on improving that bound. You can see some examples on the slide. In the context of 381 in this class, we're obviously going to stick with Edmunds and Karp and Ford Folgersen in terms of what you're responsible for. But this has been a rich area of research for decades and decades. So we've got an algorithm now. Network flow is this amazing hammer that's being used in a wide variety of things.

And it's being used for matching, bi-predate matching, all sorts of things. Let's do an example. I'm going to switch gears for a second here. How's this going to work? Switch gears. And...

Try this again. Okay. Okay, so my favorite example is something that's related to sports. Baseball elimination. So what is this application about? You see charts that correspond to how your team is doing.

Preseason standings, right? You go to ESPN and click on standings for baseball, for example. It doesn't... Now you see preseason standings, but let's assume it's August or something. And you click on standings and you see a chart that corresponds to games played, games won, games lost, games remaining, so on and so forth, right? And back in the day, when they were...

There were just winners corresponding to each division. You had to win your division to make the playoffs. You had to be the best. Now, if you ended up being tied, you ended up having to play an elimination game. But the whole purpose of this analysis is deciding whether you still have a chance to make the playoffs or not, okay? So the goal here is you want an algorithm that's going to look at the standings and decide if your team is alive or not.

Are you going to make the playoffs? And so you can be very optimistic. You might think that this is straightforward. I'm going to add a couple numbers and figure this out. It turns out it's not quite that simple. Those sports writers would love to think that, right?

That it's as simple as adding up a bunch of numbers. And obviously there's a network flow lurking in here somewhere, right? So this is not quite historical in terms of the standings. I tweaked the numbers a little bit in order to make this example interesting. But roughly speaking, let's go August 30th, 1996, okay? This was the standing corresponding to the American League East.

And now this is 1996. So the teams are a little bit different from what we have, right? So New York, unfortunately, was just leaving the division even back then. We still had Baltimore. There was Boston. There's Toronto, Detroit.

This was before realignment. And so I'm going to say these are WI, are the wins so far. LI are the losses. RI are the remaining games to play. And this is usually what you see. I mean, this is the simple version of the standings.

I'm not going to write down what Detroit is simply because I'm going to vary that number, okay? It gets interesting as that number varies. And each of these teams had 28 games to play, okay? Now I'm going to also add Rij, which are the games that the teams play against each other. And the reason is simple, this linear correlation between win-loss columns, specifically corresponding to games that Boston plays with New York. No ties in baseball.

So Boston wins, New York loses, and vice versa. So I want those numbers as well. And these are things that you typically don't see, but they're going to be important because they do determine whether your team is alive or eliminated. The reason I have dashes here is because a team doesn't play itself against each other, right? So that's what those dashes are on the diagonal. So all that most sports writers do is say team I is eliminated.

If WI plus RI is strictly less than WJ for some J, right? So you're just going to say, okay, you know what? If I won all my games and I'm still not going to make it to this team, what am I trying to say? If I won all my games, I'm still not going to make it to this team that's already won 75 games, right? And so clearly I'm done. That team has already won more games than I could possibly win.

So that's an easy one. And so this is strictly less because we're talking about elimination, right? Total elimination. Let's just say that you had Detroit and you're talking about W5 years. We're talking about the missing number where the question mark is in the table, right? Is 46.

Okay, we're defining that to be 46. L5 is 88, the other question mark in the table. So we're having a bad season here and you're going to say 46 plus 28 equals 74, which is less than 75. Therefore, in this scenario, Detroit is eliminated. So this is sufficient, but I claim it's not necessary. So you might actually have false hope if you are a minor sports writer who only knows how to add up these numbers and compare it with others.

But if you were a 381 student and you went through these wonderful lectures on network flow, you know much more, right? And we're not quite there yet in terms of requiring the power of network flow. So that's basically the essence of the issue. There's stuff going on which corresponds to teams playing each other that can affect the outcome. It gets complicated as you get closer to the edge cases. I want to give you a general purpose technique that obviously is going to use MaxFlow to solve this problem, right?

So we're going to set this up and that's actually one of the nice things about maximum flow, how you can translate. You can sort of create these networks from tables or whatever you have, add capacities to the edges, find MaxFlows and solve these problems. Okay, so this is a good example of that. Let's go ahead and look at the network flow based on this table. So this graph is trying to determine, this is a flow network to determine if team five, Detroit, is eliminated. This is just the flow network and the reason you don't see five here is because this is analysis four team five.

So the other four teams show up here. They have edges going to T, S is on the left and it's got a bunch of edges going out of the nodes. What are the pairs? As you can imagine, the pairs correspond to the games that each of these teams that are inside of the circles play against each other. Okay, so three plays four, a certain number of times. According to our table, it's four times.

Right. So we have four, four, four, five, seven, two, right there on the left, right. And the edges in between are going to have capacities of infinity. And how are these edges structured? So far, I've just explained how the left hand side works. These edges have a capacity of infinity.

One, two goes to one, one, two goes to two, one, three goes to one, one, three goes to three. And that's kind of it, right? So that's where these edges are. That's how these edges are introduced. The final edges also need capacities. This is crucial.

It turns out that we have to add capacities such that this max flow is going to represent elimination. So these capacities have to be chosen. And in particular, the equation for this is simply w5 plus r5 minus r1. In the case if it's 48, I'm asking the question for 48, for w5 plus 28 minus 75. So that's a one. And then the next down is w5 plus r5 minus w2.

So following that pattern gives us five, seven, and 13. And so you might ask, what does this represent? Well, it kind of represents what you think it represents. If you just look at the equation, it says, how much can I push through the last edge before I get greater than w1? So what is the capacity? What's the difference here?

If I have a one here, it means I see w5 plus r5. I'm one greater than w1. So in particular, the capacities are the number of games team I can win and not have more wins than team five. And I'm just trying to figure out how much I can allow with respect to this other team to determine elimination for the particular team that I'm looking at. Team five, right? Or not, whatever you're doing.

So in particular, let's say team I wins one particular game. So it goes up to 76. And if it goes up to 76, it does not necessarily have more wins than team five because team five can go up to 76 as well. Right? That's pretty much it. And same thing for team two, team three, and team four.

So the intuition here. So what we're going to do is compute the max flow and look for a certain property on that network. And that's going to tell us if team five is eliminated or not for the particular choice of wi of 48, because that's how we constructed this particular example. So the intuition is assume team five wins all remaining games. That makes sense. This this is best case scenario you're trying to figure out.

In the best case scenario, are you eliminated or not? Is team five eliminated or or not? And what you want to do is divvy up the remaining games and that corresponds to sending flow through these edges. So flow through these edges corresponds to assigning wins to teams one, two, three and four. That's the key. Divvy up the remaining games so all teams have less than or equal to W five plus R five wins.

So what does it mean if all teams have less than or equal to W five plus R five wins? If you can divvy up such that that's the case, what does that mean for team five? Team five is still in the game, right? Team five is not eliminated. So if you can do this, then team five is not eliminated. If you can't team five is eliminated because some team is going to get 77 wins.

Somehow a flow analysis has got to be in here. That that type of analysis has got to be in here to show that some team is going to get 77 wins because you know that Detroit is going to be eliminated here. But we want to show that in terms of the max flow on this on this network, right, that there's an associated theorem here, we have to find the max flow for this. And that should take just a minute. I'm going to set it up so that it's pretty much the end of this. Finding the max flow, what that means.

But the theorem is that team five, obviously, you can do this for any team is eliminated. If and only if the max flow does not saturate all edges leaving the source, i.e. in this case, the max flow is strictly less than 26, which corresponds to the sum of those six five plus seven plus whatever those are. And so what does it mean to saturate all these edges? It means that all of the games have been played all the relevant games here that affect team five have been played. So you want to play all the games because that's the end game, if you will. But basically what the intuition here is that saturation of those edges corresponds to playing all remaining games.

And the argument is not a proof if you can't play all remaining games without exceeding the the capacity of i to T edges. Team five is eliminated, right? So you have to saturate because you have to play all the games. And when you do that saturation, obviously, your flow network has to satisfy its laws corresponding to the capacity that we have in there, right? And it's quite possible that this 13 here is going to cause a restriction over on the left that corresponds to requiring the not all games we play in order for Detroit to survive, right? And so that's what we have.

So so saturating the network means that playing all or yeah. So so saturating the network means playing all the games, right? And if you get a max flow to be more concrete, if you can get a max flow that's less than 26, then you've saturated all the edges. And this means you've played all the games and you found the team that beats you that beats team five, I guess. So what happens then? Let's take a look at this.

All you have to do here is find the max flow and then we can go back to the statement of the theorem. So I want to find the min cut corresponding to this, which is going to tell me what the max flow is. I could go around for. OK, yeah. So anyway, there's we can just look at it, right? We can just eyeball this.

Use our eyeballs and find the min cut here, which has the minimum capacity. The min capacity is going to tell us where our max flow is. We know that from the max flow min cut theorem, right? So I want to cut this network into capital S and capital T to find the max flow. OK, so I'm going to use a different color here now. This line, this red color line is showing the cut.

So we have S on the left and on the right is cap T. So I've got small s and the cap S small t and cap T. I've got this for in cap T. Notice that I've got three to four, two to four, one to four in cap T. And I've got these other ones in cap S. So all I've done here, forget about baseball elimination, is find a min cut.

And if you look at what the the value of this min cut is, the value of the min cut is simply the capacities of the edges that go from S to T. So it's it's simply the the S to T edges summing over the capacities. OK. And if you take a look, you've got four plus four plus four corresponding to those three red arrows on the left. And the other edges I've got are one, five and seven. So I've got those arrows shown in red on the right.

So four plus four plus four plus one plus five plus seven equals 25. And so this implies elimination, because what I've done is found the max flow, which is strictly less than 26, which means I have not saturated all the edges that come out of S. I've not been able to play all the games. And so if I played all the games, I'd be exceeding some capacity constraint. And if I push more flow in there, I'd be exceeding some capacity constraint on the right side. And that would imply that Detroit is eliminated because some team would have seventy seven wins.

OK. Hopefully you get the gist of it. Kind of a fun kind of silly example. But take a look at this. The particular example or I'm sorry, the particular values aren't important. The framework of translation is is important.

OK. And I'll see you next day.