Okay. Today, we're going to continue our theme. Today, we're going to continue our theme of data structures, but this time, instead of doing a fancy cool data structure, we're going to look at fancy cool analysis techniques for our data structures. These are useful for tons of different data structures, especially in the context when you're using a data structure to implement an algorithm. For example, in Dijkstra's, when you learn Dijkstra's algorithm, you had lots of different heap structures you could use for the priority queue in Dijkstra's. They gave a lot of different running times with Dijkstra, but the key thing in that context is that you cared about the total running time of the algorithm, less than you cared about the individual running time of each operation.

That's what amortization is about. I guess it's a technique from financial analysis, but we've appropriated it in computer science as an analysis technique to say, well, let's not worry about every single operation in the worst case. Let's just worry about the total operation, the sum of all the operations cost. That's the whole idea of amortization, but there's lots of different ways to do it. We're going to cover four different methods for doing it and three-ish examples of doing it today. Let me first remind you the example of table doubling.

This came up in the context of hash tables. As you may recall, if you store n items in a hash table of size m, there are m slots in the table, let's say, using hashing with chaining, then we got an expected cost constant plus the load factor size of the table divided by the number of terms, of items, I should say, items. We want to get constant expected. We want this to always be at most a constant. I guess we could handle a larger table size, although then we're unhappy about our space, but we definitely want m to be at least around n so that this works out to order 1. The solution for doing this was table doubling.

Whenever the table is too small and we have too many items, double the size of the table. n is the same thing that we can't control. That's the number of items somebody is inserting into the table. If n grows to the value to match m, then double m. m prime equals 2m. To double the table size, you have to allocate a new array of double the size and copy over all the items. That involves hashing. Overall, this will take order size of the table work.

Doesn't matter whether I'm using m or m prime here because they're within a constant factor of each other. Linear time to do an insertion is clearly bad. This is all during one insertion operation that this would happen. Overall, it's not going to be bad because you only double log n times. If you look at the total cost, maybe you think, oh, is it log n per operation? It's not so bad because total cost for n insertions starting from an empty structure is something like 2 to the 0.

This is big theta outside. 2 to the 0, I'm sorry, 2 to the 1, 2 to the 2. We're only doing insertions. If we're only doing insertions, this is great. 2 to the log n. This is a geometric series. This is order n. To do n insertions costs theta n, big O n.

We'd like to say the amortized cost per operation is constant because we did n operations. Total cost was n. On average per operation, that was the only constant. This is the sense in which hash tables are constant expected amortized. We'll get back to hashing in a future lecture. For now, we're going to think about this as a general thing where you need table doubling.

This gives you a fast way to insert into a table. Later we'll think about deleting from a table and keeping the space not too big, but that's a starting point here. This is an example of a general technique called aggregate method, which is probably the weakest method for doing amortization, but maybe the most intuitive one. The aggregate method says, well, we do some sequence of operations. In general, there are k operations. Measure the total cost of those operations, divide by k.

That's the amortized cost per operation. You can think of this as a definition, but it's not actually going to be our definition of amortized cost. We're going to use a more flexible definition. For simple examples like this, it's a fine definition and it gives you what you want. When your sequence of operations is very clear, there's only one thing you can do at each step, then great. We get a very simple sum.

As soon as you mix inserts and deletes, the sum is not so clear, but in some situations the sum is really clean. Compute the sum, divide by number of operations, you get a cost, and that could be the amortized cost. That's the aggregate method. Works great for simple sums. Let me now give you the general definition of amortized bounds, which becomes important once you're dealing with different types of operations. I want to say an insert cost, one bound amortized and maybe a delete cost, some other bound.

What you get to do is assign a cost for each operation. I should call it an amortized cost such that you preserve the sum of those costs. What I mean is that if I look at the sum over all the operations of the amortized cost of that operation and I compare that with the sum of all the actual costs and operations, the amortized should always be bigger because I want an upper bound on my actual cost. If I can prove that the amortized costs are at most, say, constant per operation, then I get that the sum of the actual cost is at most constant per operation. I don't learn anything about the individual cost, but I learn about the total cost. In the context of an algorithm like Dijkstra's algorithm, you only care about the total cost because you don't care about the shortest pass at time t.

You only care about the shortest pass when the algorithm is completely finished. In a lot of situations, maybe not a real-time system, but almost everything else, you just care about the sum of costs. As long as that's small, you can afford the occasional expensive operation. This is a more flexible definition. One option would be to assign the average cost to each operation, but we have a whole bunch more operations. We could say inserts cost more than deletes or something like that.

In fact, let's just do an example. I claim I'm going to look at three operations on two, three trees. One is create an empty tree. I need to think about how we're getting started in amortization. Let's say you always start with an empty tree. It takes constant time to make one.

I pay log n time, and we're going to tweak that a little bit for an insertion. I pay zero time per delete in an amortized sense. You can write big O of zero if you want. Same thing. Deletion you can think of as a free operation. Why?

This is a bit counterintuitive because, of course, in reality, the cost of a deletion is going to be log n. You can never delete more elements than you've already inserted. I can bound the deletion cost by the insertion cost. In the context of just the aggregate method, you can look at the total cost of all the operations. I guess we're not exactly dividing here, but if we look at the total cost, let's say we do C creations, I insertions, and D deletions, then the total cost becomes C plus I times log n plus D times the log n. The point is D is less than or equal to I because you can never delete an item that wasn't already inserted if you're starting from an empty structure.

This is I plus D times log n, but that's just at most twice I times log n. We get C plus I log n. We can think of that as having a D times zero, zero cost per deletion. This is the sum of the actual costs. This is the sum of the amortized costs, where we say zero for the deletion. We just showed that this is an upper bound on that, so we're happy.

There's a slight catch here, and that's why I wrote star on the n, which is not every operation has the same cost. When you start from an empty structure, insertion costs constant time because n is zero. When n is a constant, insertion is constant time. When n grows to n, it costs log n time. At different times, n is a different value, and n I'm going to use to mean the current size of the structure. For this argument to work at the moment, I need that n is not the current value because this is charging work.

Some insertions are for large structures, some are for small structures, some deletions are for small, some for large. It gets confusing to think about. We'll fix that in a moment, but for now, I'm just going to define n star to be the maximum size over all time. If we just define it that way, then this is true. That will let me pay for any deletion, but we'll remove that star once we get better analysis methods, but so far this is going to be good. Let's go to our next method, which is the accounting method.

It's like the bank teller's analysis, if you will. These are all just different ways to compute these sums or to think about the sums, and usually one method is a lot easier, either for you personally or for each problem more typically. Each problem, usually one or more of these methods, is going to be more intuitive than the others. They're all kind of equivalent, but it's good to have them all in your mind so that you can think about the problem in different ways. With the accounting method, what we're going to do is define a bank account, and an operation can store credit in that bank account. Credits might not be the best word because you're not allowed for the bank account to go negative.

The bank account must always be non-negative balance because otherwise your summations won't work out. When you store credit in the bank account, you pay for it, as if you're consuming time now in order to pay for it in the future. Think of operations costing money. Whenever I do a deletion, I spend actual time, log in time. If I had log in dollars in the bank, I could pull those out of the bank. I can then use those dollars to pay for the work, and then the deletion itself becomes free in an amortized sense.

This is on one hand, when I do an assertion, I'm going to physically take some coins out of myself. That will cost something in the sense that the amortized cost of insertion goes up in order to pull those coins out of the bank, but then I'll be able to use them for deletion. This is what insertion is going to do. I can store credit in the bank, and then separately, we will allow an operation to take coins out of the bank, and you can pay for time using the credits that have been stored in the bank, as long as the bank balance remains non-negative at all times. This will be good. The bank balance is a unused time.

We're paying for it to store things in there. If we don't use it, well, we just have an upper bound on time. As long as we go non-negative, then the summation will always be in the right direction. Let's do an example. I guess maybe go back to this as a first example. When I do an insertion, I can put, let's say, one coin of value log and star into the bank.

The total cost of that insertion, I pay log and star real cost in order to do the insertion. Then I also pay log and star for the coins to put them in the bank. When I do a deletion, the real cost is log and star, but I'm going to extract out of it log and star coins. The total cost is actually free. The total amortized cost is free. The reason that works, the reason the balance is always non-negative, is because for every deletion, there was an insertion before that.

That's maybe a little less intuitive way to think about this problem, but you could think about it that way. More generally, what we'd like to say is that we only put log and without the star, the current value of n per insert and a zero per delete amortized. We'd like to say, okay, let me put one coin worth log n for each insertion. When I delete, I consume the coin. In general, the formula here is that the amortized cost of an operation is the actual cost plus the deposits minus the withdrawals. Insertion, we just double the cost because we pay log n to the real thing.

We pay log n to store the coin. That's the plus deposit part. Insertion remains log n. Then deletion, we pay log n to do the deletion, but then we subtract off the coins of value log n. That hopefully works out to zero. Again, we have this issue that coins actually have different amounts depending on what the current value of n was.

You can actually get this to work if you say, well, there are coins of varying values here. I think the invariant is if you have a current structure of size n, you will have one coin of size log 1, log 2, log 3, log 4 up to log n. Each coin corresponds to the item that made n that value. When you delete an item at size n, you'll be removing the log nth coin, the coin of value log n. You can actually get this to work if you're careful. The invariant is one coin of value log i for i equals 1 to n.

You can check that the invariant holds. When I do a new insertion, I increase n by 1 and I make a new coin of log that value. When I do a deletion, I'm going to remove that last coin of log n. This does work out. We got rid of the n start. Let's use the same method to analyze table doubling.

We already know why table doubling works, but good to think of it from different perspectives. It's particularly fun to think of the coins as being physical objects in the data structure. Let's say when we insert an item into a table, and here I'm just going to do insertions. We'll worry about deletions in a moment. Whenever I do an insertion, I'm going to put a coin on that item. The value of the coin is going to be a constant.

I'm going to give the constant a name so that we can be a little bit more precise in a moment. We're going to call it C. Let's look at this with some animation to illustrate. We start with an array of size 1. Let's go here. We insert a single item.

We put a coin on it. I insert some x and I put a coin on the item. When I do the next insertion, let's say I have to double the table to size 2. I'm going to use up that first coin so we delete it. We put a new coin on the item that I just put down. We're calling it Y in general.

The next time I double, which is immediately, I'm going to go to size 4. I erase the coin that was with Y and then I put a coin with Z and W. Then I have to double again. Here I'm going to use my two coins to charge for the doubling. Then in the next round, I'm going to be inserting into my empty spots. I'll be putting a coin here, here, here, and here.

In general, you start to see the pattern that by the time I have to double again, half of the items have coins. The other half don't because I already used them. You have to be careful not to use a coin twice because you only get to use it once. You can't divide money into double money unless you're doing stocks, I guess. As soon as I get to a place where the array is completely full, when N equals M, the last half of the items will have coins. I'm going to use them in order to pay for the doubling.

The number of coins here will be N over 2. This is why I wanted to make this constant a little explicit because it has to be bigger than 2 in some sense. However much work, let's say it takes A times N work in order to do doubling, then this constant should be something like 2 times A because I need to do the work to double, but I only have N over 2 coins to pay for it. When we double, the last N over 2 items have coins. The amortized cost of the doubling operation is going to be the real cost, which is some theta N minus the number of coins I can remove and their value. It's going to be minus C times N over 2.

The point is that this is 0 if we set C large. It only has to be a constant. It needs to be bigger than 2 times that N constant. Usually when you're working with coins, you want to make the constants explicit just to make sure there's no circular dependence on constants. Make sure there's a valid choice of C that annihilates whatever cost you want to get rid of. This is the accounting method view of table doubling.

Okay, so far so good. You also think about the amortized cost of an insert. It costs constant real time. Actual cost is constant. You have to also deposit one coin, which costs constant time. The amortized cost of the insert is still constant.

That's good. Still, we don't know how to deal with deletions, but let me give you a reverse perspective on the accounting method. It's called the charging method. It's also a little bit time travel-ish. What we're going to do is allow, there's no bank balance anymore, although it's essentially there. We're going to allow operations to charge some of their cost retroactively to the past, not the future.

If you're not allowed to time travel to the future, you're only allowed to go to the past. You've got to be a little bit conservative in how you do it. You can't just keep charging the same operation a million times because then the cost of that operation is going up. At the end of the day, every operation had to have paid for its total charge. There's an actual cost, which it starts with, and then there's whatever it's being charged by the future. From an analysis perspective, you're thinking about the future.

What could potentially charge me? Again, you can define the amortized cost of an operation. It's going to be the actual cost minus the total charge to the past. When we charge to the past, we get free dollars in the present, but we have to pay for whatever the future is going to do. We have to imagine how many times could I get charged in the future? I'm going to have to pay for that now in a consistent timeline.

You will have to have paid for things that come in the future. Let's do an example. It sounds crazy and weird, but I actually sometimes find this a lot more intuitive to think about even in these very examples. Let's start with table doubling. We have this picture already, but it's going to be pretty much the same. After I've doubled the table, my array is half full.

Again, insertion only, although we'll do insertion and deletion in a moment. In order to get from half full to completely full, I have to do n over two insertions. It's looking very similar, but what I'm going to say is that when I double the array next time, I'm going to charge the doubling to those operations. My funny arrows here. In general, you can actually say this quite concisely. Whenever I do a doubling operation, I'm going to charge it to all the insertions since the last doubling.

That's a very clear set of items. Doublings happen, and then they don't happen for a while. Just all those insertions that happened since the last doubling charged to them. How many are there? As we've argued, there are n over two of them. In order to make this doubling free, I need to charge theta n.

This doubling costs theta n, but there's n over things to charge to. I'm going to uniformly distribute my charge to them, which means I'm charging a constant amount to each. The key fact here is that I only charge and insert once. Because of this since clause, I will never charge an item twice as long as I'm only inserting it for now. If you look over all time, you will only charge and insert once. The insert has to pay for their total charge in the future.

There's only one charge, and it's only a constant amount. Then amortized cost of insert is still constant. Amortized cost of doubling is zero because we charge the entire cost to the past. Same example, slightly different perspective here. Let's do a more interesting example. Inserts and deletes in a table.

I want to maintain that the size of the table is always within a constant factor of the number of items currently in the table. If I just want an upper bound, then I only need to double. If I also want a lower bound, if I don't want the table to be too empty, then I need to add table having. What I'm going to do is when the table is 100% full, if I double its size, sorry, if the table is 100% full, then I double its size. When the table is 50% full, should I have it in size? Would that work?

No, right? Because I can basically do insert, delete, insert, delete, insert, delete, and every single operation costs linear time because maybe I'm a little bit less than half full and then I'm going to have to shrink the array into half. Then if I immediately insert, it becomes 100% full again. I have to double in size. If I delete, it becomes less than half full and I have to have in size. Every operation would cost linear time.

Amortized cost is linear. That's not good. What I'll do is just separate those constants a little bit. When I'm 100% full, I'll double. That seems pretty clear. Let's say when I'm a quarter full, then I will have.

Any value less than 50 would work here. This works as well. This will be constant amortized per operation. It's especially the initial analysis we did of table doubling isn't going to work here because it's complicated. The thing's going to shrink and grow over time. Just summing that is not easy.

It depends on the sequence of operations, but with charging and also with coins, we could do it in a pretty clean way. I'm going to do it with charging. This particular choice of constants is nice because when I double a full array, it's half full. Also, when I have an array that's a quarter full like this, and then I divide it and then I shrink it, I get rid of the right half part. It's also half full. Whenever I double or half, the new array is half full, 50%.

That's nice because 50% is far away from both 25 and 100. Our nice state is right after a doubling or a half, then we know that our structure is 50%. In order to get an underflowing state where we have to have, I have to delete at least a quarter of the items, a quarter of M. In order to get to overflowing where I have to double, I have to insert at least M over two items. Either way, a constant fraction times M, and that's what I'm going to charge to. To be clear, when I'm 50% full, I might insert, delete, insert, delete many different inserts and deletes.

At some point, one of these two things is going to happen though. In order to get to 25% full, I have to do at least M over four deletions. I might also do more insertions and deletions, but I have to do at least that many, and those are the ones I'm going to charge to. I'm going to charge a halving operation to the last M over four deletions since the last resize of either type, doubling or halving. I'm going to charge the doubling to the at least M over two insertions since the last resize. That's it.

Because halving costs data M time, doubling costs data M time, I have data M operations to charge to. I'm only charging constant for each operation. Because of this since last resize clause, it's clear that you're never charging an operation more than once because you can divide time by when the resize happens, grows or shrinks, halves or doubles, and each resize is only charging to the past a window of time. It's like you have epics of time. You separate them. You only charge within your epic.

That's cool. You only get a constant number of charges per item of constant amount. Therefore, insertions and deletions are constant amortized. Doubling is free amortized. That's where amortization starts to get interesting. Let's go to something even more interesting and in some sense more powerful.

The last method on our list for today, which is potential method. This is a good exercise in how many ways can you skin a cap? Potential method, I like to call it defining karma in a formal way. This is more like the counting strategy though, formally. We're going to think about there being a bank account with some balance, but we're going to define that balance as a function of the data structure state. That's called the potential function.

You can think of it as a bank balance. You can think of it as a kinetic potential, I guess, potential energy. Just like the bank account, we want this function to always be non-negative. We'll also make it an integer that would be convenient. The potential function is basically trying to measure how bad is the data structure right now. It's, again, like saving up for a rainy day.

We want that whenever we have to do an expensive operation like a double or half, that this potential has grown large enough that we can charge that cost to a decrease in the potential. It's like this is storing up energy and whenever we have some free time, we'll give some of that to the potential function. It's just like the accounting method in some sense, but we're defining things differently. In the accounting method, we explicitly said, hey, look, I'm going to store some credit right now. We're basically specifying the delta. Now we're going to define this natural function of the current state.

From that, you can compute the deltas, but also from the accounting method, you can integrate and compute the potential function. They're interchangeable, but usually it's easier to think about from one perspective or the other. Really often, you can just look at what's going on with the data structure and say, hey, this aspect of the data structure makes it bad, makes costly operations. You can just define the potential function and then check that it works. It's a little bit of black magic to come up with these functions. It depends how you like to think about things.

As before, we can define an amortized cost. It's going to be the actual cost plus the change in the potential. Change of potential is just the potential after the operation minus the potential before the operation. It's obvious from the way we set things up, but what I care about is the sum of the amortized costs. I care about that because it's supposed to be an upper bound on the sum of the actual costs. If you look at what the sum is, on the right-hand side, I have amortized costs plus the fee after the operation minus the fee before the operation and some people say, phi.

If I add all those up, the delta part telescopes or you get cancellation from each term with the previous term. The sum of the amortized costs is equal to the sum of the actual costs plus phi at the end minus phi at the beginning. A slight catch with the potential method, when you define things this way, you also have to pay for phi at the beginning because we want the actual cost to be at most amortized cost. We need to take the phi beginning part and put it over on the left of the equation so it's at most sum of amortized costs plus phi at the beginning. When you define a potential function, you'd really like it to be zero at the beginning. It's funny, but you pay phi of the beginning state at the beginning of time.

When you've done zero operations, you really like the cost to be zero and you don't want to have stored stuff in the bank. This should be a constant would probably be okay or whatever the cost of your first operation is, but should be constant or zero. Usually we do this by saying, look, let's start with an empty structure and work from there. Usually phi of an empty structure is zero and all is well. When you're defining things with potential function, you have to be careful about your initial state. You have to make sure it's non-negative.

All this infrastructure, okay, what is it good for? Let's do some examples. A classic example is amortization of incrementing a binary counter. When you have some binary value like this one and you increment it, many bits change, but only a constant number are going to change in an amortized sense. If I start with a zero-bent vector and I increment, well, the very first increment costs one and then the next increment costs two and the next increment costs one. Then it's a fractal.

Instead of thinking about the fractal and working hard to prove that summation is linear for an operation, let's use the potential method. The intuition here is actually pretty easy because an increment has a very clear cost. It's just the number of trailing ones plus one. That's what it is in actual cost. We'd like that to be constant. Intuitively, what is making an increment bad?

Intuitively, what is making an increment bad? If you add a name one thing, if I just look at a configuration, is it bad? What makes it bad? The total number of ones. If let's define fee, could be the number of one bits. Intuitively, ones are bad.

This is a good definition because when I increment, I only create one one. I'm not going to have this issue that fee goes up by a lot. Delta fee is really, really large. In a scenario on the top line here, I destroy three ones and add one. In general, if there are let's say T trailing bits, then an increment destroys T one bits and it creates one one bit. That's always what happens, right?

T could be zero and then I have a net positive of one, but most of the time actually I destroy one bits. Well, more than half of the time. I destroy one bits and I just create a single one bit in terms of the total number of ones. Amortized cost is the actual cost, which is one plus T. Then if I count the number of bits that change, then that's exactly one plus T in an increment. Now the change of potential is that I decrease by T.

I increase by one, I get two. Now we're measuring the number of changed bits, but not running time, just FYI. Binary counters, constant amortized operation. I think this is a very clean, much easier than analyzing the fractal of the cost, right? Now, binary counter with increments and decrements, that doesn't work. There are other data structures to do it.

That's for another class, but that's where we wanted to get to today and I'll see you next time.