Okay. Okay, good morning, everyone. Let's get started. We're going to start 381 in earnest today. We're going to start with our first module on divide and conquer. You've all seen dividing conquer algorithms before merge sort is a classic divide and conquer algorithm.

I'm going to spend just a couple of minutes talking about the paradigm. Give you a slightly more detailed overview of what you're going to do. We're going to start with the paradigm. The paradigm give you a slightly more general setting than merge sort. And then we'll get into two really cool divide and conquer problems in the sense that these problems for which. Divide and conquer works very well.

Mainly convex hole and median finding. So let's get started with the paradigm associated with divide and conquer. It's just a beautiful notion that you can break up the problem into smaller parts and somehow compose the solutions to the smaller parts. So the details are going to be what's important when we take a particular problem instance. But let's say we're given a problem of size and we're going to divide it into sub problems. I'll put that in quotes so you know it's a symbol here a sub problem of size and over B.

And here a is an integer. And a is going to be greater than or equal to one. It could be two. It could be three. It could be four. This this is the generalization I alluded to and and B does not have to be two or even an integer, but it has to be strictly greater than one.

Otherwise there's no notion of divide and conquer. You're not you're not breaking things up in a smaller problem. So so B should be strictly greater than one. So that's the general setting and then you'll solve each sub problem recursively. And the idea here is that once a sub problem becomes really small, they become constant size. It's relatively easy to solve them.

You can just do exhaustive search. If you have 10 elements and you're doing effectively a cubic search while 10 cubed is a thousand. That's a constant. You're in great shape as long as the constants are small enough. And so you're going to recurse until these problems get small. And then typically this is not true for all divide and conquer approaches, but for most of them and certainly the ones we're going to cover today, the the smarts is going to be in the combination step when you combine these problems, the solutions of these sub problems into the overall solution.

And so that's the story. Typically what happens in terms of efficiency is that you can write a recurrence that's associated with this divide and conquer algorithm. And you say T of N, which is a running time for a problem of size N is going to be T F N over B. And this is a recurrence. Plus the work that you need to do for the merge operational or the combined. This is the same as merge, right?

And so you get a recurrence and you're not quite done yet in terms of the analysis, because once you have the recurrence, you do have to solve the recurrence. And it's usually not that hard. And it certainly is, it's not going to be particularly difficult for the divide and conquer examples that we're going to look at at least today, of course. But we also have this theorem that's called the master theorem. That's essentially something where you can fairly mechanically plug in the A's and B's and whatever you have there, maybe it's data N, maybe it's data N squared and get the solution to the recurrence. It's a fairly straightforward template that you can use for most of the dividing conquer examples we're going to look at in 381 with one exception that we'll look at in median finding today that will simply give you the solution to the recurrence.

Okay. So you've seen most of these things before this. This is a little bit of setup. And so let's dive right into convex hole, which is my favorite problem when it comes to using divide and conquer. So convex hole, we, I've tried to show some examples of this. I've tried to show some examples here in the slide, but the, but the idea here is that we have a two dimensional problem with a bunch of points in a two dimensional plane.

You can certainly do convex hole for three dimensions, many dimensions, and convexity is something that's a fundamental notion in optimization. And maybe we'll get to that in advanced topics, maybe, maybe not, but in the context of today's lecture, what we're interested in doing is essentially finding an envelope or a hole associated with a collection of points on a two dimensional plane. And this hole obviously is going to be something as, as you can guess that encloses all of our points. Okay. So what we have here are some image illustrations to show this, imagine a set of points and a string that runs along the outside. We want the string to enclose all the points.

We don't want data points outside of the hole. Okay. So that's the game. We have to find an algorithm and we look at a couple of different ones that we'll find all of the segments that are associated with this convex hole. So we're trying to find segments. So if you're going to working with segments or tangents, they're going to be used synonymously.

All of the tangents or segments associated with the entirety of the convex hole, we're trying to discover them. And the only input that we have is the set of points, X, X, I, Y coordinates. And there's just a variety of algorithms that you can use to do this. The one I wish I had time to explain, but I'll just mention is what's called a gift wrapping algorithm. You might not have done this, but I guarantee, you know, you've, you've probably taken a misshapen gift, right? And tried to wrap it in gift wrapping paper.

And when you're doing that, you're essentially, if, if you're doing right, you're essentially trying to find the convex hole of your three-dimensional structure. You're trying to tighten it up. And you're trying to find the minimum amount of gift wrapping paper. I'm not sure if you ever thought about minimizing gift wrapper paper, but gift wrapping paper, but definitely should have. That's like always, I feel like, you know, part of the fun when you're wrapping gifts. But that's the convex hole of a three-dimensional shape.

We're going to stick to two dimensions for now because we'll have to draw things on the slide and, and on paper, of course. So let's spec this out a bit. I'm, I'm, so let's say we're given end points in a plane. And the set of points are s I, X I, Y I, such that I equals one, two to N. And we're just going to assume here, just to make things easy, because we don't want to have segments that are null or segments that are a little bit different because they're discontinuous. We're going to assume that no two have the same X coordinate.

This is just a matter of convenience. And no two have the same Y coordinate. And then finally, no three in a line, because we want to be able to look at all the numbers of points and find these segments. And it just kind of gets inconvenient. You have to do special cases if there are three of them on a line. And so the convex hole itself is the smallest convex polygon containing all points in s.

And we're going to call that C H of X, convex hole of the S. And so just as an example on slide, when you have something like this, you're going to have your convex hole being on the outside line. And these two points, X and V, are inside of it. And all the other ones form the hole. So we've got P, Q, R, S, T, U, and V and X are inside of the hole. They're not part of the specification of C H of S, which I haven't quite told you how we're going to specify that.

But the way you're going to specify that is simply by representing it as a sequence of points that are on the boundary on the hole in clockwise order. And you can think of this as being a doubly linked list in terms of the data structure that you'd use if you coded this up. So in this case, it would be P to Q to R to S. You're going to start with T in this case. It's a doubly linked list. So you could conceivably start with anything.

But that's the representation of the convex hole. And we're going to use clockwise just because we want to be clear on as to what order we're enumerating these points. It's going to become important when we do the divide and conquer algorithm. So let's say that we didn't care about divide and conquer just for the heck of it. And I gave you a bunch of points over here. Can you think of a simple, you know, forget efficiency for just a couple of minutes.

Can you think of a simple algorithm that would generate the segments of the convex hole? Okay. For example, I don't want to generate the segment V X, right? If I think of a segment as being something that's defined by two points, then I don't want to generate the segment V X because clearly the segment is not part of the convex hole. But whereas the segment P Q, Q R, R S, etc. There are, they're all part of the convex hole, right?

So, so what is the obvious brute force algorithm for getting efficiency that gives this set of points that will, you know, will generate one by the, by one, the segments of the convex hole? How about if you draw a line, right? And then you just look at it and, and you look at half the plane. And if all the points are to one side, it's a segment of the convex hole. But if they're not, it's not a segment, right? Beautiful.

Okay. So are we done? So, so here we go. Let's, let's go back to this to make sure we're clear here. So, so for drawing the line and you have points on either side of your line, that would not make up part of your convex hole, right? But if we're drawing a line and there's, there's work capturing everything to one side of that line, that line could conceivably be part of our convex hole.

So we've got a little more to do here. But what we have here in terms of an algorithm, these points are the same as before. So let me just quickly recap. So I'm going to draw a pair of points. I'm going to draw in a dotted fashion first, right? I'm going to draw that segment.

And I'm going to look at that line and say that this, this breaks up, if it breaks up the plane into two halves, not good, right? Are all the points on one side though? And if the answer is yes, I'm going to go ahead and say that it is part of my convex hole. And if the answer is no, like in this case, I'm going to drop that segment, right? So let's talk about complexity. Let's say that there are endpoints here and how many segments do I have?

I have O and square theta, theta and square segments, right? And what's the complexity of this test? What is the complexity of the test that's associated with once I've drawn the segments deciding whether the segment is going to be a tangent, which is part of the convex hole or not? What is the complexity? Well, obviously, Sean, but O of n, right? So on test complexity, O of n, and we've got overall theta and cubed complexity, okay?

So it makes sense to do divide and conquer if you can do better than this, because this is a really simple algorithm. The good news is that we'll be able to do better than that. And now that we have a particular algorithm, we can think about how we can improve things. And of course, we're going to use divide and conquer. So let's go ahead and do that. So generally, the divide and conquer, as I mentioned before, in most cases, the division is pretty straightforward.

And that's the case here as well. All the fun is going to be in the merge step. Right. Okay. So what we're going to do, as you can imagine, we're going to take these points and we're going to break them up. And the way we're going to break them up is by dividing them into half lengths.

So we're just going to draw a line. And we're going to say everything to the left of the line is one sub problem. Everything to the right of the line is another sub problem. Go off and find the convex hole for each of those sub problems. If you have two points, you're done. Obviously, it's trivial.

And at some point, you can say I'm just going to deal with brute force. If we can go down to order n cubed, if n is small, I can just apply that algorithm. So it doesn't even have to be the base case of n equals one or n equals two. That's a perfectly fine thing to do. But you could certainly go with n equals 10, as I mentioned before, and run this brute force algorithm. And so at that point, you know that you can get down to a small enough sub problem, small enough size sub problem for which you can find the convex hole efficiently.

And then you've got these two convex holes, which are clearly on two different halves because that's the way we define them. And now you're going to merge them and that's where all the fun is. Okay, so we're going to write this out. You're going to start to, you're going to sort the points by x coordinates. And we're going to do this once and for all. We don't have to keep sorting here, because we're just going to be partitioning based on x coordinates.

And we can keep splitting based on x coordinates because we want to generate these half links, right? So, so if we can do those once and for all, and for the input set s, we're going to divide into the left half a and right half b by the x coordinates. And then we're going to compute ch of a and ch of b recursively, and then we're going to combine. So the only difference here from what we have before is the specification of division. It looks pretty generic. It's similar to the paradigm that I wrote before, but I've specified exactly how I'm going to break this up.

So let's start with the merge operation. We're going to spend most of our time speccing that. And again, there's many ways you could do the merge and we want the most efficient way. That's, that's obviously going to determine complexity. So big question then how to merge. So what I have here, if I look at the merge step, I've created my, my two sub problems corresponding to my two half planes.

And let's say I've generated at this point a convex hole associated with each of these problems sub problems. So what I have here is a one, a two, I'm going to go clockwise specifying the convex hole. And the other thing that I'm going to do in the sub problem case, my starting point is going to be for the left sub problem, the coordinate that has the highest x value. Okay, so let's a one in this case, the highest x value going over x, x is increasing to the right. And for the right half of my problem, it's going to be the coordinate that has the lowest x value. I'm going to go clockwise in both of these cases.

So when you see an ordering associated with the subscripts for these points, start with a one or B one then go clockwise. And that's how we we number this just notational nothing profound here. So I've got these two convex holes, these, these sub holes, if you will. And what I need to do now is merge them together and you can obviously look at this and it's kind of obvious what this, what the overall convex hole is right. But the key thing is I'm going to have to look at each of the pairs of points that are associated with the left side, and the right side and try to generate the tangents the the new tangents that are not part of the sub holes, but they're part of the overall hole right. So in this case, you can imagine an algorithm that's going to kind of do what this brute force algorithm does, except that it's looking at a point from the left side and to a point from the right side.

So you can imagine that I'm going to do a pair wise generation of segments. And then I'm going to check to see whether these segments are actually tangents that are part of the overall convex hole or not. So what I would do here is I look at this and and that's going to be. Well, let me ask, is that going to be part of the overall hole. No, right and precisely why not can you tell me why segment a one b one is not part of the overall hole. Think about that for a sec.

If we were to draw a line, which in this case, there is a line. Then we have things on both sides right so that's not part of it. Now if I look at this well same same reason right that's not part of it in this case, and very obvious example. I'm going to do something that's slightly less obvious in case you get your hopes up that we have this trivial algorithm. Okay, so this is looking good right this is supposed to be a straight line by the way. So a for b to, I mean that's that's looking good right because all the points are on one side so a for b to is our upper tangent right so our upper tangent is something that we're going to define.

If I look at each of these things I'm going to say that they have a y i j. Okay, so what is y i j y i j is the y coordinate of the segment that I'm looking at the i j segment. So this y i j is for a i and b j. So what I have here is why for two at the point in the middle and this for for the upper tangent y i j is going to be the maximum right because that's the same thing. So this is essentially something which would ensure me that there are no points higher than that right. So if I go up all the way and I find that this has the maximum y i j.

That's going to be my upper tangent because only for that will I have no points ahead of it. Okay, so why I j is upper tangent this is going to be maximum. So what it makes sense that the lower tangent is going to have then the lowest y i j. So hopefully we're we're good there so clearly there's a trivial merge algorithm here and the trivial merge algorithm is to look at not every pair of points every a b pair right every a i b j pair. And so what is the complexity of doing that if I have n total points the complexity would be would be in in square right because maybe I'd have half here half here ignore constants. And you could say well it's going to be n squared divided by four but that's data and squared so there's an obvious merge algorithm that is data and square looking at all the points and when I mean all pairs of points I mean like an a and a b.

Because I want to pick a pair when I go left of that dividing line and then right of that dividing line but either way it's data and squared came so now you look at that and you go huh can I can I do better though what if I just went for the highest a point and the highest b point. And I just do that right is that it I'm done wouldn't that be wonderful right wonderful but but incorrect okay so so what is an example. So this is something that I spent a little bit of time thinking about I'm like you guys I do my problem sets tonight before. Okay so don't don't do as I do but do as I say I've done this for a bit so that's maybe one difference but this particular example is new. So what I have here I'm going to show you why there's not a trivial algorithm okay so you can't just pick the highest points and keep going right that would be constant time though. So I've got my a on the left let's assume I have my dividing line in the middle again, and then I'm going to have B one will move clockwise.

We've got a B to be well be for B three B two. So you can see here if I look at a four a four to be one versus let me just eyeball it right a three to be one a four to be one is going to be the upper tangent no. Because a three well hopefully you can see it's light but a three is lower than a four and a and be one is lower than be to right. So, I'm sorry then before I don't know what I said before. So it's clear that if I that if I just took a four to be. One that wouldn't be an upper tangent right everybody can see that hopefully so so all good so we can't just have a constant time algorithm we can have theta and square.

Anyway, so so is there something maybe maybe we have a theta and how how would we do this merge and find the upper tangent by being a little smarter about searching for pairs of points that give us this maximum y i j right our goal is simple. At some level if you just looked at the brute force I would generate each of these things I would find the y j intercepts associated with our line and just pick the maximum and the constant time algorithm doesn't work. The theta and squared algorithm definitely works but we don't love it. So there has to be something in between right do you have any ideas think about this for a second. Okay, so maybe you're thinking isn't the obvious merge algorithm theta and cute and my answer is no, because the theta and extra factor came from the fact that you had to check every point every endpoint to see on which side of the plane it was. Whereas here what I'm doing is I've got this one line here that's basically. y equals zero or i'm sorry x equals zero I guess or or x equals some value, and I just need to once I have the equation for the line associated with you know a four b one or a four b two I just have to find the intercept of it, which is constant time right.

And then once I find the intercept of it I just maximize that intercept to get my y i j. Okay, so so it's only theta and squared right so this is actually quite clever this particular algorithm we meant I mentioned it briefly some lectures ago called the two finger. algorithm and i'm going to demonstrate to you the two finger algorithm for merging these two convex holes and then we'll talk about the complexity of it, and rather than using my fingers because obviously we're working electronically here i'm going to demonstrate that by showing the lines. In the slide so so the way the two finger algorithm works this demo hopefully is going to clear everything up i'm going to attempt. To to demo this algorithm that's a more clever merge sort algorithm than the one that uses order and square time and. And anyway okay let's take a look at it and it's going to get you the correct upper tangent and what we are starting at here is with the left of our red colored line at a one, which is defined to be the point that's closest to the vertical line that you see up on the slide. And the one that has the highest x coordinate and the end of our red line segment is on B one, which is the point that has the smallest x coordinate on the right hand side sub hole.

And what we do is we compute for the segment a one b one we compute why i j in this case, why one one, which is the intercept on the vertical line that you see here marked with the red dot. And what happens now is I move clockwise i'm going to go from be one to be four and what happened here did why i j increase or decrease well as you can see here it decreased and so i'm going to go back to to be one and we're not quite done done here now we're going to go counter clockwise over to a four on the left and we're going to check again. Alright, so let's check again whether why i j increased or decreased it's clear that why i j increased. So now we move to this point. And as of this moment we think that a four b one has the highest why i j, but we have a while loop. We're going to have to continue with this while loop.

And now what happens is I'm going to go from be one clockwise again to be four. And when this happens why i j decreases slightly so i'm going to go back to be one, and now we're going to go counter clockwise to a three. And you can see why three one increased a tiny bit. And so we're we're going to now stop this iteration of the algorithm and we're at a three b one which. Which we think at this point is our upper tangent right but let's check that so start start over again on the right side be one to be four what happens. Well why i j decreases slightly so i'm going to go back to be one.

And then we're going to go counter clockwise on the left as well and go to a three. No sorry go go a three to a two. And you can see that would be a very big decrease in why i j. So we keep at a three. Okay, so at this point we've tried both moves right we've tried a left clockwise move and a right counter clockwise move a move from be one to before and move from a three to a two. So we've converged who are out of our while loop a three b one for this example is example is our upper tangent okay.

So the reason this works is because we have a convex hole here on the left and a convex hole here on the right. We are we are starting with the points that are closest to each other in terms of a one being the closest to our vertical line be one being the closest to the vertical line and we're moving upward in both directions, because I went clockwise. On the right and I went counter clockwise on the left side, and that's the intuition of why this algorithm works we're not going to do a formal proof of this algorithm but the monotonicity property corresponding to the convexity of this sub hole and the convexity of the the other sub hole, essentially can give you a formal proof of correctness of this algorithm. We don't really cover that in 381 as much. So, so all that remains now is to look at our pseudo code which matches the execution that you just saw, and talk about complexity of pseudo code. So what is.

Oh, here's our sub holes I guess that's showing some holes. Okay, so. Okay. So what is the complexity of this algorithm. It's order and right so what has what's happening here if you look at this while loop is that while I have two counters, I'm a sexual I'm essentially looking at two operations per loop, and either one of those counters is guaranteed to increment through the loop. And so since I have in this case p points in in, you know, in one case p plus q equals n.

So, so let's say I had p points on the left and q points on the right, and p plus q equals n, and I got theta and merge simply because I'm going to be running through and incrementing as long as I'm in the loop I'm going to be incrementing either the I or the J. And the maximum they can go to our p and q before I bounce out of the loop or before they rotate around. And so that's why this is theta n. And if you put it all together in terms of what the merge corresponds to in terms of complexity and put that together with the overall divide and conquer okay let's do that so. So, what I can do, let's go back to this slide from before there's there's nothing that's stopping me when I've sorted these points by the x coordinates to do the division such that there's exactly the same number assuming an even number of points exactly the same number on the left hand side, or the right hand side. But I can get that right roughly certainly within one very easily right and the next problem we'll look at the median finding problem will find that trying to get the sub problem to be.

Roughly equal sizes actually a little bit difficult okay but I want to point out that in this particular case it's easy to get the sub problems that are half the size because you've done the sorting. And then you just choose the line the vertical line such that you've got a bunch of points that are on either side, equally. In terms of the merge operation we have to T and over to because of our division right plus data and and you recognize this recurrence is the old it's the old merge sort recurrence. So, we did all of this in, well, it's not technically merge or clearly algorithm is not merge sort, but we got the same recurrence and so this is theta and log in so quite a lot better than theta and cute cute. And there's no convex full algorithm that's in the general case better than this even the gift wrapping algorithm that I mentioned to you with the right data structures, it gets it gets down to that in terms of theta and login but no better. So question then that I want to cover.

How do I remove the lines it's actually a fairly straightforward let's go back to this slide here. So it's a little simple cut and paste approach where let's say that I find the upper tangent AI BJ, and I find the lower tangent let's call it a KBM. And in this particular instance, what do I have I have a one a two a three a four as being one of my sub holes, and I have be one to be to be three before as the other one. So what did we determine to be the upper tangent, it was a three b one right so a three b one was my upper tangent. And I guess so a one b two was my lower tangent. The big question is now that I found those two how do I generate the collect representation, the, you know, the collective representation of the overall convex hole, you need to do what's called a cut and paste that's associated with this, where we're just going, we're going to have our left side and our right side so for if we're going to have these two things, then we've got to generate a list of points now clearly a four is not going to be part of that right a four is not going to be part of my, my overall convex hole.

What is it that we want, we want something like a one a two a three b one b two b three before right, but there's a point that we have to discard here, right agreed. And so the way we do that is very mechanical that's that's the good news here I mean you don't have to look at it pictorially I made that up just eyeballing it right. And so what we're going to do is we're going to say the first link engine in general the first link is ai to bj because that's my upper tangent okay. In this case it's going to be a 3d one okay, and I'm going to go down the b list, you're going to go down the b list until you see bm which is the lower tangent you're on the b list. So you're you're looking for the lower tangent point, and then you're going to jump until you see bm. You link it to a k, you link it to a k and continue until you return to ai, and then you have your circular list okay so what you see here is you have a three here on the front end.

So I'm going to go ahead and write out the execution of what we just talked you through okay so. Oops, here it is on one. So we've got a three, we jump to to be one. So I'm going to we write down b one, then we're going along all the bees until I get to be four. In this case I'm going to include all of the bees right so we have b one b two b three before. And then we jump from before to a one, because that's part of my lower tangent.

I've got a one here a two and then back to a three which is great because then i'm done right. And so exactly what we said happened, or is going to happen happened which is that we drop a four but we kept all of the other points. So what is the complexity of cut and paste its order and right i'm just walking through these lists. So there's no hidden complexity here. Okay, so we're going to go on to median finding very, very different set of issues here. Still on divide and conquer but a very different set of issues the specification here is of course straightforward you can think of it as, I just want a better algorithm then sorting and looking for the median at the particular position in over to position.

In over to position for example, let's say and is odd, and it's floor of and over to you can find that median right so it's pretty easy if you do. If you can do sorting, but we're never never satisfied with just using a standard algorithm right if we think we can do better than that. So the whole game here is going to be, I'm going to find the median, and I want to do it in better than theta and log n time. So that's what median finding is all about you're going to be using divide and conquer for this. And so in general, we're going to define given a set of n numbers, define rank of x as the numbers in the set that are less than or equal to x. So in general the rank of course is something that could be used very easily to find the median so if you want to find the element of rank n plus one divided by two floor that's what we call the lower median and n plus one divided by two ceiling is the upper median, and they may be the same if n is odd, but that's what we want.

So you can think of it as it's not finding. It's not median finding but finding elements within a certain rank and we want to do this in linear time. Okay. So we're going to apply divide and conquer here and as always the template can be initiated and the devil is in the details for either division or merge. And we had most of our fun with convex full on the merge operation. It turns out most of the fun here with respect to median finding is in the divide.

Okay. So what I want is the definition of a select routine that takes a set of numbers s and and I here is rank right so I want rank I and that I might be n over two. Well, floor of n and plus one over two right. And so what does the divide and conquer look like. Well, first thing you need to do is divide and as of now we're just going to say you're going to pick some element. Pick some element x belonging to s and this choice is going to be crucial but at this point I'm not ready to specify our choice yet.

Okay. So we're going to have to do this cleverly. And then what we're going to do is we're going to compute on K, which is the rank of x and generate two sub arrays such that I want to find the fifth highest element. I want to find the median element I want to find the 10th highest element. So I have to keep track of what happens in the sub problems because the sub problems are going to determine, depending on how many elements are inside of those sub problems which, which I can only determine after I've solved those sub problems right. I'm going to have to to collect that information and put it together in the merge operation.

So I want to find the 10th highest element, and I've broken it up relatively arbitrarily. It's quite possible that the 10th highest element is going to be discovered in the left one or the right one. And I have to show that it's the 10th highest and it might be that there's four elements in the left and five on the, well, let's see, I guess, if I define the rank as less than or equal to x, there's four on the left and five on the right that are smaller. And that's why this is the 10th highest element. And that's essentially what we have to look at so B and C are going to correspond to the sub arrays that you can clearly eliminate one from them you can count the number of elements and be count the number of elements and C and you can eliminate one of them in this recursion as you're discovering this element with the correct rank in this case, I what I have here pictorially is I've generated B here and see. So, we've got all of B to the left, all of B to, I'm sorry, I'll see to the right.

So, I have minus elements k minus one elements here in B, and let's say I have n minus k elements in C. Once I've selected a particular element, I'm going to look at all the elements that are less than it and put it into the array B. I'm going to look at all the elements that are better than it let's assume all the elements are unique, and I'm going to put all of them into C, and I'm going to recur on B and C those are those two are my sub problems. So, what I have to do is once I recur and I discovered the ranks of the sub problems, I have to put them together. So what I have here is if k equals I so so I computed the rank and I realized that if k equals I, then I'm just going to return x. I'm done at this point right we got lucky we picked an element x and it magically ended up having the correct rank okay not always going to happen.

So, in the other case, if k is greater than I, then we're going to return select be I. So what I've done here is if k greater than I, I'm going to say oh so now I'm going to have to find the element in B. I know that it's going to be in B because k is greater than I, and I've got to find the exact position depending on what I is over here right. So it's going to be somewhere between one and k minus one. And then the last case is if k is less than I, then this is a little more tricky I'm going to read, I'm going to turn return on C of I minus k. What happens here is that my K is the rank for the x that I looked out over here is less than I.

So I know that I'm going to find this element that I'm looking for in C but if I just look at C, I don't want to look at C and look for an element of rank I within C right that doesn't make sense because I'm looking for an element of rank I in the overall array that was given to me. So I have to subtract out the k elements that correspond to x and all of the k minus one elements that are in B to go figure out exactly what position or rank I'm looking for in the sub array corresponding to C. Okay, so that's just a small little thing that you that you have to keep in mind as you do this so that's looking pretty good. Okay, am I done here. You can imagine the answer is no. Now, can you think of at least from an efficiency standpoint, what might happen where you know what what we're looking for here as, as you can imagine, we want to improve on theta and log in.

And so you could say well I'm happy with theta and that theta and complexity algorithm is better than a theta and log and complexity algorithm, which is kind of in the bag, because we know how to sort and we know how to index so we want a theta and algorithm. Now if you take this and if I just picked let's say the biggest element I kept picking x to be and or n minus one or just picked a constant value I picked in the middle. And I picked the index I can always pick an element based on its index. I can always go for the middle one. So what is the worst case complexity of this algorithm if I don't specify or I give you this arbitrary selection corresponding to x belonging to s. What is the worst case complexity of this algorithm.

It's n squared right so what happens is you're doing bunch of work here with this this data and work our computing step is theta and work. So given that you're doing theta and work here you have to be really careful that's how you pick the x element. So what might happen is you end up picking the x. You know way way out there and given the particular rank you're looking for you have to now you're left with a large array that has n minus one elements in the worst case you started with n. You did not go to n over two and and and and over to which is what divine and conquer is all about right or even n over B right. And then you go to n minus two and minus three because you're constantly picking this this is worst case analysis.

You're constantly picking these sub arrays to be extremely unbalanced so when the sub rays are extremely unbalanced, you end up doing theta and work in each level of the recursion, and those are going to be randomized algorithms because you're going all the way from end to one are going to be theta and square when you keep doing that okay. So this is data and square. If you have bad selection so we won't talk about randomized algorithms, but the problem with randomized algorithms is that the analysis will be given a probability distribution, and it'll be expected time what we want here is a deterministic algorithm that's guaranteed to run in X theta and so we want a deterministic way of picking X belonging to us such that all this works out. And when we get our recurrence and we solve it somehow magically we're getting fully balanced partitions firmly balanced sub problems in the sense that it's not n minus one and one. So it's something like it could even be n over 10 and nine, nine and over 10 but as long as you guarantee that you're shaking things down geometrically, and the asymptotics is going to work out but the determinism, the determinism is what we need. So we're going to pick X cleverly, and we don't want the rank X to be extreme this.

So this is not the only way you could do it but this is, you know, supposed to be very, very clever. There is a deterministic way, and you're going to see some arbitrary constants here what what we're going to do is we're going to arrange s into columns of size of five right we're going to take this single array, and we're going to make it a two dimensional array where the number of rows is five and the number of columns that you have is n over five, the ceiling in this case, and then we're going to sort each is sort each column big elements on the top. We're going to do this in linear time, and you might say how did that happen well there's only five elements so it's linear. So this is the first one you could do and raised to the four but it's five raised to four, and it's constants. Right, this is where theory kind of comes into play here. So, then we're going to find what we're going to call the median of medians.

So I'm going to explain this this works for arbitrary rank but it's a little easier to focus in on the median to just explain the particular example okay, but as you can see there's an other one that's actually associated with the breakup. So here we go we're here's the picture and I'm going to try to argue that this deterministic strategy that I'll specify gives you fairly balanced partitions in all cases okay so what we see here is pictorially you see columns of five, each of these dots dots corresponds to a number. This is this you know one dimensional array got turned into a two dimensional array right so I've got four full columns and it's suddenly possible given and that my fifth column is not full right so that's certainly possible that's what we've got up here. And I'm going to, I'm going to look at that I'm going to look at the middle element of each of these n over five columns that's exactly what we want to look at. If I look at what I want what I want over here is our x in the middle. If I want to find I'm going to find the median of medians.

So it's our x in the middle denoted is circled x in the middle. So this is true. It's true the first that these columns I'm just putting that up here imagining we're just seeing x. Oh, that's all I'm saying okay. That's not guaranteed to be x because the columns themselves are, well these columns are sorted. And what I'm going to have to guarantee of course is that when I go find this meeting of medians is that it ends up being something that gives me balanced partitions.

So maybe say a little bit. Okay, let me talk before I explain what's going on. Okay, so each of these columns is sorted s is arranged into columns of size five. Like I just said here these are medians okay they're circled in the image and denoted as medians. And if I look at determining the medians and I say that once I've determined this middle x which I've discovered that it's the median. Then this is right there in the middle.

There's going to be a bunch of columns to the left of it a bunch of columns to the right of it and in this case I have five columns I could have more. And it happens to be the third one. So the idea is that once I find this meeting of medians which corresponds to this x number. I can say that all of the columns, the right corner all correspond to columns that have their median element greater than x, the left corner correspond to columns that have their median element less than x case circled again in the image. So what I have here in this picture is that these elements here in the top are going to be greater than x and the elements here in the lower left corner, I mean less than x. And what's happened here is we've not only sorted all the columns such that you have large elements up in the top, each of these five columns have been sorted that way.

On top of that I've discovered the particular column that had that corresponds to the median of medians, and this is our middle x, and it may be the case that these columns aren't sorted. It might be larger or vice versa, I don't know, but it's guaranteed that once I find this median that I do know that all of the columns that have elements in the lower left position are less than my x. And I know that up in the right position those have elements that are greater than x. Now my goal here and you can kind of see from here as to where we're headed hopefully what I've what I've done here by this process of sorting each column and finding the median of medians is I have found this meeting of meetings such that there's a bunch of columns to the left roughly half of those elements. And those columns are less than x, and there's a bunch of columns to the right and roughly half of those columns have elements that are greater than x. So what I now have to do is a little bit of math to show you exactly what the recurrence is.

So that's the last thing we have to do. So I want to now make a more quantitative argument that the variable being n as to how many elements are guaranteed to be greater than x. And essentially what I'm saying which we're writing out here. So what I have on that picture on the slide, half of the n over five groups contribute at least three elements greater than x except for one group was possibly less than five elements, which is the one I have all the way to the right and the one group that contains x. So for all the other columns, I'm going to get three elements that are greater than x. And so if you write that out this says there are at least three and over 10, because I have half of all those groups minus two, and I'm not counting perfectly accurately here but I have an at least so, so we should be fine.

So the numbers n over 10 minus two elements are strictly greater than x, and that comes from the picture. I'm going to be able to say the same thing for less than x as well I, I can't count the one right depending on how things go maybe I could have played around and subtracted one instead of two in the latter case but I'm going to be conservative here. It's clear that I'm going to have a bunch of columns that are full of columns that are full columns that are going to be contributing three elements that are greater than x. And in this case, I have well two of them here for for the less than x, and I got one for the greater than x. So that's, that's all that I'm seeing over here with respect to the balance of partitions. And it turns out that's enough it turns out all I have to do with this observation is to go off and run the recurrence and we're going to get an efficient algorithm.

There's always a little bit of convenience thrown in here. And we'll assume that the a has unique elements. Okay, so there's there's nothing that's x. Okay, so the recurrence once you do that is T of n, we're just going to say that it's order one for n less than or equal to 140. And where did that come from. Well, it's, it's just a large number.

I like 140. It came from the fact that you're going to see 10 minus three which is seven, and then you want to multiply that by two so some reasonably large number we're going to go off and we're going to assume that it's a constant. And you could sort those 140 numbers and find the median or whatever rank. It's all constant time once you get down to base case. So you just want it to be large enough such that you could break it up and you have something interesting going on with respect to the number of columns. So don't worry much about that number the key thing here is is the recurrence alright so so what's going on here.

What are all of these components corresponding to the recurrence really quickly this is simply something that says I'm finding the meeting of meeting so so that T and over five there. That's finding meeting of mediums I'm finding some element that has a certain rank so so this meeting of mediums is going to be running on and over five columns. And I'm going to be calling this algorithm recursively the median finding algorithm to do that finding the median of mediums. Then next, I'm going to be discarding at least, you know, regardless of what I do, because I have, I take the overall end and then I'm going to discard in my in my paradigm I'm either going to go with be, or I'm going to go with see depending on what I'm looking for. And then, given that be and see are not completely unbalanced, I'm going to be discarding three and over 10 minus six elements, which simply corresponds to me ignoring the ceiling here and multiplying the three out so that's three and over 10 minus six. So then I've got seven and over 10 plus six.

That's the maximum size partition that I'm going to recur on it's it's only going to be exactly one of them. And then you can see from that. It's either else. It's not recurring on both of them it's it's recurring on one of them so that's where the seven and over 10 plus six comes from. And then you ask where does theta and come from. Well the theta and comes from the fact that I do have to do some sorting.

So I'm going to do some constant time sorting for every column okay because it's only five elements so I'm going to do some constant time sorting, but there's order in columns, because it's, then it's an over five columns so this is the sorting of all columns at the end there so I'm going to do some of that and and I'll just leave you with you cannot apply the master theorem for solving this particular recurrence but if you make the observation that n over five plus seven and over 10 is actually less than n so you get point two and and point seven and that's actually less than and this thing runs in linear time so so this whole thing is theta and time so pretty exciting stuff and we'll see you next time.