Okay. Okay. Welcome back to dynamic programming. We're now in step two or four going to see a bunch more examples, three more examples of dynamic programming, longest common sequence, longest increasing sequence and kind of a made up problem for 381, alternating coin game. And through those examples, we're going to explore a few new ideas, things we haven't seen in action before yet, dealing with multiple sequences instead of just one, dealing with substrings of sequences instead of prefixes and suffixes, parent pointers, so we can recover solutions like in shortest pass and a big one, which will mostly be fleshed out in next lecture, is sub problem constraint and expansion. This is all part of the sort bot paradigm.

Remember sub problems, relations, topological order, base case, original problem and time. Here is sub problems and relations. I have written down both what these things are and key lessons we got from the first dynamic programming lecture, namely, we want to split up our problem into multiple sub problems. And if your input is a sequence, that's the main case we've seen so far. Like the bowling problem, for example, then the natural sub problems to try our prefixes, suffixes or substrings, prefixes and suffixes are nice because there's a few of them. There's only a linear number of them.

In general, we want a polynomial number. Sometimes you can get away with one of these. They're usually about the same. Sometimes you need substrings. There's a quadratically many of those. Then once you set up the sub problems, you can set up the sub problems.

There's a quadratically many of those. Then once you set up the sub problems, which it's easy to set up some problems, but hard to do it right to test whether you did it right, is can I write a recurrence relation that relates one sub problem solution to smaller sub problems solutions. And the general trick for doing this is to identify some feature of the solution you're looking for. So if you're trying to solve some sub problem and you try to ask a question, whose answer would let you reduce to a smaller sub problem. So if you can figure out what that question is and that question only has a polynomial, excuse me, number of answers, then boot, you've only got polynomial number of sub problems and then you will get a polynomial running time. So I have, I think, another way to say this, we just locally brute force all possible answers to whatever question we came up with, as long as there's polynomial many, polynomial many.

And then each of them is going to recursively call the smaller sub problems because we memoize, we'll only solve each sub problem once. And so on the end, the running time will be at most the number of sub problems times the non recursive work done in that relation. For that to work, of course, the relations between sub problems must be a secret, a cyclic. So we'd like to give an explicit topological order. Usually it's a couple of for loops, but this is a topological order in the sub problem DAG, which I defined somewhat informally last time. The vertices are sub problems.

And I want to draw an edge from a smaller sub problem to a bigger sub problem, meaning that if I evaluate B in this relation calls, if evaluating B in this relation calls a, then I'll draw an arrow from a to B from the things I need to do first to the things I'll do later. So then topological order will be ready by the time I try to compute B, I will, I will have already computed a. And of course, the relation also needs base cases. And then sometimes the original problem we want to solve is just one of those sub problems. Sometimes we need to, to combine multiple we'll see that today. So that's a review of this framework.

And let's dive into longest common sequence, subsequence, excuse me. This is kind of a classic problem. It even has applications to things like computational biology. You have two DNA sequences, you want to measure how common they are. Things like that. So for an example, it could be a sequence of letters.

So my first sequence spells, hieroglyphology. That's kind of a tricky word. Study of hieroglyphs. And second sequence spelled Michelangelo. And what I'd like is a subsequence. So remember, substring has to be some continuous range, some interval.

Subsequence, you can take any subset of the letters in your sequence or any subset of the items in your sequence. So you can have blanks between, you can have blanks in between. You can skip over items. And so what we want is the longest sequence that is a subsequence of both the first string and the first sequence and the second string. And if you stare at this long enough, the longest common subsequence, I don't think it's unique, but there is a longest common subsequence, which is hello, hiding in there. And that is a longest common subsequence.

So given that input, that my goal is to compute hello or whatever the longest common subsequence is. So we're given, we write this down carefully given two subsequences, let's name them A and B, we want to find the longest sequence L, that is the subsequence of both A and B. So that's the problem definition. And we're going to see how to solve it using dynamic programming. And whereas in the bowling problem, we just had a single sequence of numbers, the values of the bowling pins. Here we have two sequences.

And so we need a new trick before we said, okay, if our sub problems, or sorry, if our input consists of a single sequence, we'll try prefixes, suffixes or substrings. Now we've got two sequences. So somehow we need to combine multiple inputs together. And so here's a general trick, sub problems for multiple inputs. It's a very simple trick. We'll just take the product, multiply by multiply the sub problem spaces.

Okay, so in the sense of cross product of sets and in particular from a combinatorial perspective. So we have two inputs, the first sequence A and the second sequence B. For each of them, there's a natural choice or there's three natural choices prefixes, suffixes or substrings. I will choose suffixes for A and suffixes for B, you could do some other combination, but that would be enough for here. And then I want to multiply these spaces, meaning they're meaning the number of sub problems is going to be the product of the number of suffixes and our first word times the number of suffixes in our second word. And in other words, every sub problem in longest common sequence is going to be a pair of suffixes.

Okay, so for LCS, our sub problems are L of i, j, this is going to be the longest common subsequence of the suffix of A starting at i and the suffix of B starting at j. And just to be clear, how many there are, I'll give the ranges for i and j not going to assume the sequences are the same length like in the example. So I'll write the length of a and the length of B, I like to include the empty suffix. And so when j equals the length of B, that's zero items in it because that makes for really easy base cases right. So I'd like to include those in my problems. So that was the S in sort bot.

Now I claim that set sub problems is enough to do a relation, recursive relation among them. So I'd like to solve every sub sub problem L i, j. Relation is actually pretty simple, but it's maybe not so obvious. So the idea is because we're looking at suffixes, we should always think about what happens in the first letter, because if we remove that first letter, then we get a smaller suffix. If you're doing prefixes, you should always look at the last letter. Either one would work for this problem.

So we're doing suffixes. So we look at a of i and we look at B of j. That's the first letter in suffix a starting at i and the suffix B starting at j. And there are two cases that could be equal or different. I think the easiest case to the easier case to think about is when they're different. So in hieroglyphology and Michelangelo if we look at the whole string, say the first letter in the top, it would the first top would be H.

The first letter and the second one is M. Those are different letters. So clearly one of those letters is not in the common subsequence is the subsequence, because they don't match. I can't start with an H. Well, I can start with an H. I could start with an M, but I can't start with both, I guess.

One of those letters is not in the output. In this example, it's M. But I don't know which one. So I have this question. I want to identify some question. And the question is, should I, do I know that the H is not in the answer?

Or do I know that M is not in the answer, the final longest common subsequence. We don't know which so we'll just try both. And then we're trying to maximize the length of our common subsequence. So we'll take the max of Li plus one plus one j and Li j plus one. So the intuition here is one of at least one of AI and BJ is not in the LCS. If AI is not in, then I want to look at the suffix starting at I plus one.

If BJ is not in, then I want to look at the suffix starting at J plus one. So the indices are always increasing in the function calls. And the other case is that they're equal. So this one I have a bit harder time arguing. I'm going to show you the answer and then I'm going to tell you the answer is correct. Here I claim you don't need to make any choices.

There's no question you need to answer. You can actually guarantee the AI and BJ might as well be in the longest common subsequence. And so I get from one point, one point for that and then and then I recurse on all the remaining letters. So from I plus one on and from J plus one on. Okay, so two cases, pretty simple formula and then we're basically done we just need to fill in the rest of sort bot. So next is topological order.

So I'll write this as for loops. Because I'm dealing with suffixes, we want to start with the empty suffixes and then work our way to larger and larger suffixes. So this might seem backwards if you're doing prefixes, it would be an increasing order. There's all sorts of orders you could flip the I and the J it's very symmetric so it doesn't really matter. But anything that's generally decreasing I and J is good. Then we have base cases, these are when the sub I'm sorry the sequences are empty.

I don't care how many items are in B but if a has no items there's no common sub subsequence it's empty. And same for no matter how big a is if I've exhausted the B stream. I start from beyond the last item. Then I should get zero. Then the original problem we want to solve is L zero zero. That's just the longest common sequence of the entire a and the entire be in time.

So for for time, we need to know how many sub problems there are it's a plus one times B plus one. I'll just call that theta a B assume there are assume that they are non empty subsequences also. So this is the number of sub problems and then what we care about is how much time do we spend for each sub problem and evaluating this recurrence relation. So we ignore the cost to recursively call these L's because they are smaller sub problems they've they're already dealt with when I multiply by the number of sub problems. So I just care about this max computation and this this equality check and we'll say those each cost constant time. So this is quadratic time if the two strings are size n this is this is n squared.

In general it's the product of the two string sizes and that's the longest common substring. So pretty straightforward. Other than that, other than this little argument understanding the case when they're equal, the easy case where they're unequal, we just try the only two things we could do one of a I and B J is not in the longest common subsequence. So what I like to say is is we guess which of those is the correct one that is not in the longest common subsequence. And if we guess that it's in a then we read then we recurse on that side and if we guess that it's in J then we recurse on by by increasing J. I'd like to assume not really that we always make the correct guess that we made the correct choice whether it's I or J.

Now we don't actually know how to do that so instead we just brute force, we try both of them and then because we're trying to maximize we just take the max just another way of thinking about it. But overall pretty straightforward. The only added complication here is we had to deal with the two sequences simultaneously, and we just took the product of those pretty easy. In general, if you have some constant number of sequences you can afford to do this you'll still get polynomial. But of course once you go to end sequences sequences, you can't afford this you, you would end to the end, that's end to the end behavior. So that's a limit of how far you could go.

These sequences is fine see three sequences is fine but end sequences, there is probably no polynomial time algorithm for this problem. Cool, I want to show you an example. I have an example here. I didn't want to try out hieroglyphology versus Michelangelo so came up with another example. Okay, let's see there happens. Okay, so longest common.

Where is this. Okay, so, can you guys see one. See no screen. Anyway, okay so the longest common subsequence of of there and habit is high. It's, it kind of looks like a grid graph. The, the base cases here.

Let's see. Here we go. Now you can see what I'm seeing I think. Okay. Okay, so it's a big grid graph here their base cases are out on the edges because those correspond each of those notes is a sub problem. And, and, and this corresponds to what is the longest common subsequence subsequence between EIR and a BIT and it should be I it's the only letter they have in common that's why there is a one here to say that the longest common subsequence has size one.

Okay, so if you can kind of see on on the outskirts there. The base cases are when either there has been emptied or when habit has been emptied. So those all have zeros on the outside. And then the problem we care about is, is the top left note it's there, it's there versus habit claim the length is two. And what I've drawn in here are what I'll call parent pointers like we talked about with BFS and shortest pass and so on. So we have this choice sometimes we had a choice on whether we recurse li plus one j or we curse li j plus one, the red arrows are drawn to li j from one of these in those recursion case.

And diagonal edges are exactly the edges, the cases where the letters match. Here we see an h equals h i equals i so there's a diagonal edge drawn. That's the first case where the letters are equal and so I recurse by increasing i and j that's why I get a diagonal edge. And the lower left corner there where t is t. So for those we are getting a one plus, you'll see this is, you'll see this one is one larger than zero. The two where the h's are the same is one larger than the one where the eyes are the same is one larger than the zero.

And for every other vertex we are recursing to the right and down. And we see what those two numbers are and we take the max so this whole diagram is just filled in by for each position where they're not equal. You look at the guy below you look at the guy to the right those are slightly smaller substrings we look at those values we take the max. As long as you compute this in a generally right to left and bottom up fashion, wherever you're trying to compute a guy you, you will have to you will. Its predecessors already computed that's the topological order of this graph, and then at the end we get our answer which is to. And now if we pay attention to where we came from for example.

I yeah okay it's kind of hard to like, because I can't point to you, but anyway, I'll try to do I'll try to film like a little example where I can film from point of view filming. Anyway, so in this case the diagonal edges correspond to my matching letters. So there's we have an H we have an I so high is our common is our longest common substring. In general, we just follow the pointers backwards the red pointers and we get our answer. So not only do we compute the length of the lcs but we actually can find the lcs using parent pointers. And this is a concept you can use in most dynamic programs including all the months from today.

And now we move on to longest increasing subsequence. Okay, so this problem has almost the same name but it's quite different in behavior longest increasing subsequence, LIS, instead of LCS both both famous problems examples of dynamic programming. So we're just given one sequence like carbohydrate. So this is a sequence of letters, and I want to find the longest subsequence of the sequence that is increasing strictly increasing let's say so in this case alphabetically. I could include CR for example but not CB that would be a descending sequence in this example, the right answer or a right answer is abort here. So in general, we're given some sequence a and we want to find the longest increasing subsequence of a the longest sequence that is increasing strictly.

We could use the same thing to not only solve the same problem but also to find the longest increasing subsequence of a the longest sequence that is increasing strictly. We could use the same thing to not only solve strictly increasing, but so here things are going to be be a little trickier. It's easy in that we just have a single sequence right. So again, we could try prefixes suffixes or substrings I personally prefer suffixes. Maybe you prefer prefixes, whatever you prefer is fine. But always generally start there because there's nothing in this problem that makes me think I need to delete things from both ends.

So I want some sub problems and I'm going to choose suffixes. So I'm going to define Lvi to be the longest increasing subsequence of the suffix of a starting at I that's the obvious thing to do. And then I'd like a relation on these. So I'd like to say what Lvi is. And what do I have to work with. Well, I have things larger than I those would be smaller suffixes but let's go back to what is a question that I could ask about this sub problem that might help me figure out what the longest increasing substring looks like.

So we're looking at here's here's you know we have a from I on longest inch increasing subsequence is some subsequence and we'd like to remove letter I. Now when we do that there are two choices maybe I is in the longest increasing subsequence or it's not. So the question I'd like to answer is, is I in the longest increasing substance subsequence of a of a from I onwards. That's a binary question there are two options so again just like before. I can brute force those two options and then when I want the longest one I'm going to take the max. So I like to take the max of something like li plus one.

So in the case that I don't put I in the solution that's fine then I just look at I plus one on recursively compute that and that would be my answer. And the other option is that I do put I in the longest increasing subsequence. So I do one plus the rest li plus one. If I close this brace, this would be a very strange recurrence because this is that's always bigger than the other one right there's something wrong here. And that's something wrong is I haven't enforced increasing at all. There's no constraints here it's just saying well, I'll put I in and then I'll do whatever remains and I'll pray that that's increasing probably won't be.

Because indeed if I is a letter or is a number that is strictly greater than I plus one then that would be wrong. Excuse me so I really can't always do this right I could check whether I plus one is in the answer but some, but I don't I can check whether the the letter I is less than the letter I plus one, but maybe I put this in the longest increasing subsequence, and then I put that. Anyway, so I need to like compare those two items. But I don't know when that's going to happen. Things seem really hard here and indeed there's no way from this sub problem definition to write down a relation, but there's a slight tweak to this definition that makes it work. So the trouble we have here.

The idea of sub problem constraints or conditions the trouble we have is when we recursively compute the longest increasing subsequence on the remainder we don't know the first item in that answer. Oh, did it give me. And so what we'd like to do is add a constraint to the sub problem that somehow lets us know where the longest increasing subsequence starts so what I'd like to say is long as increasing subsequence of that stuff it starts with a of I right that's what we want. So in other words it includes a of I. Okay, this is a bit of a funny constraint it changes the problem. It's no longer what we want to solve if you think about the original problem before it was solving L of zero.

We just want the longest increasing substance subsequence of the whole thing. Now it's not necessarily L of zero L of zero means what's the longest increasing subsequence of the whole sequence a the subsequence. I'm sorry, the whole. Okay, let's start over L of zero means what is the longest increasing subsequence of the whole sequence a that includes the first letter of a there we go. And maybe we do include the first letter of a maybe we don't. We don't know where the longest increasing subsequence starts here in our carbohydrate example it didn't it started with the second letter, but conveniently it's okay that we don't know because that's just another question we could ask is where do we start where might the LIS start could could start out the first letter the second letter the third letter there's only n choices.

And let's just take the max of all of them. Okay, so before I get to relation. Let's do original problem. I just want the max of L of I for all I. Okay, so the maximum will be the overall longest increasing subsequence so if I could find the longest increasing subsequence that includes the first letter, or the longest one includes the second letter and so on. So it starts at the first letter starts at the second letter, then this will be the max.

I'm sorry, then this max will be the longest overall. Um, this problem is not really what I wanted but it's still good enough because it lets me solve my original problem. And this is adding an extra constraint to my problem and and doing this is challenging thinking about what the right constraint that would let you solve your problem is tricky, especially in the beginning. But for now let's just take this thing. As it works. Now our max will be different.

Okay, so now I get to the central issue which is I know by the definition of li that I include letter I. This is going to be my in my longest increasing subsequence this is what I'm looking for this this definition, but I don't know what the second letter is, it could be I plus one it could be I plus two could be anything bigger. Whenever there's something I don't know I'll just brute force it I don't care that I don't know I'll just take the max over all the possible choices. Let's say that the next letter included in the longest increasing subsequence I is J, then I would look at L of J. But I'll just brute force all possible choices for J. So that's going to that's going to be I strictly less than J because I don't want to include the same letter I again.

And otherwise I would get an infinite recursive loop if I put less than or equal to here. And maybe I don't do anything else to end. Okay. Okay, so let's see not quite done now. Now, interesting part I can enforce increasing because I can't just choose any letter J to the right of I, and we have a strictly increasing property so I can add as a constraint in this max to say a of I less strictly less than a of J. And if you wanted non strictly increasing you would add an equal there.

So this is mathematical notation. In Python you would say max open parent for this thing of this thing for J in this range if this holds. So I'm just doing for loop but I only do I only look at the possible choices for J. When the in when the strict increasing property holds and then when that holds I put check this. Now this set might be empty I need to define what the max is when it's empty right. Oh and I forgot to mention the the one plus in the front.

I told that I is in the answer so we always get one and then the remainder is this or zero. If there are no AJ is greater than AI, then we'll default to zero and say that I is the only item in my increasing subsequence. So you details to get right. But in general, once you figure out what these recurrences look like they're very simple. This is one line of code, and then all you need in addition to this is the original sub problem and some other things. We need the base cases.

So we have to put them in order. Okay, so topological order is just the usual for loop because I'm doing suffixes it's going to be I equals length of a down to zero base case is going to be L of length of a which is zero because there's no letters in that suffix, and we already did. So then time is a little different from past examples so the number of sub problems just like usual is is linear length of a some problems it's only one sequence that we're thinking about now, unlike the previous example, but the work we're doing in this relationship, this is now non trivial work before we were just guessing among two different choices. Now we're guessing up to end different choices where where n here is is length of a. And so we have theta length of a non recursive work that we're doing in each sub problem, or you might think of this as choices that we're considering and for each choice we're just spending. We're just taking the max of those items adding one.

So that's a constant overhead. And so we just get this product, which is a squared. Cool, so that is longest increasing subsequence. We're using this idea of asking a question and guessing or brute forcing the answer to that question in two places. One place is we're promising. We're requesting that the longest increasing subsequence starts at I.

So then the question is, well, what is the very second item that's in the longest increasing subsequence that starts with I, we're calling that J, and we're brute forcing all the possible questions that J could be, which conveniently lets us check confirm that it's actually an increasing subsequence locally from I to J. And then L of J will take care of the rest by induction the rest of the longest increase in subsequence starting at J will also be increasing. And so this guarantees by induction, the whole thing will be increasing. Then we also use local brute force to solve the original problem so we added this constraint of starting at I but we didn't know overall where to start. That's fine because there's only a choices. So I should mention in the running time analysis.

So they're solving the sub problems, that's fine but then there's also a plus whatever it costs to solve the original problem. Okay, but that's okay because that's length of a. All of what we had plus length of a is still length of a squared. But if you're doing exponential work here that would be bad. We have to do some reasonable amount of work to solve the original problem in terms of all the sub problems. Okay, I have an example hiding here.

It's harder to to stare at here I have empathy, and this example is not. Does it have much empathy because the longest increasing subsequence of empathy is empty, empty is one of the few English words that's increasing. The hard part here is drawing the DAC it's almost the complete graph but we only draw edges from smaller letters to bigger letters so we draw from e to m from e to p from e not to a there's no edge from e to a from e to t, not from e to h but yes from e to y. We also draw from e to the base case which is there's no more letters that edge to the base case is let's just recurse. And when I said from to I actually meant the reverse all edges go from right to the left. And what we're doing is looking for the longest path in this tag longest path is maybe a problem that we've talked about in anyway well it's a dag right so we've talked about it.

And so the shortest path is the same thing as shortest path if you just negate all of the weights. There are no weights in this picture so if you just put negative one on all these edges and ask for the shortest path from the base to anywhere. So so single source shortest paths from our base, then we would end up getting this path here, which if you look at it is empty right EMP T why empty. The shortest path is indeed the right answer. What I've drawn here is the shortest path tree and so if you wanted the longest increasing subsequent I'm sorry longest increasing. Yeah, subsequent starting at a, then it is a T why just by following the red arrows.

And how do you get that you just draw the parent pointers like we did before. Note that both of our dynamic program examples today could instead, instead of writing them as a recursive thing with memoization or writing them bottom up as a for loop and then doing the computation. You could instead construct a graph and then run dag shortest pass on it. But the point is these things are the same. It's actually a lot simpler to just write the dynamic programming code because it's just a for loop and then a recurrence so you're just updating an array. Because you already know what the topological order is you don't have to write a generic depth first search algorithm.

Take the finishing order reverse it and then run this run, you know run dag shortest pass with relaxation. Much simpler just to write down the recurrence once you've figured that out. But they are the same in these examples in Fibonacci for example you cannot write Fibonacci as a single source shortest pass problem, but a lot of dynamic programs you can write as shortest path problems just a connection to things we've seen. Alright so last example. Less less problem for today we'll do more next time alternating coin game here. This is a two player game we're going to find the optimal strategy in this game.

In general you have a sequence of coins and we have two players Kate they take turns. So given coins of value v zero to v and minus one. So it's a sequence they're given an order and some order, for example, 510 125. So not necessarily sorted in order. And the rules of the game are we're going to take turns. I'm going to take turns with you I, I'm going to use one and and well let's say I'm going to use I and you to refer to the two players came.

And so in each turn either one who whoever's turn it is, I get to, we get to choose either the first coin or the last coin among the coins that remain. At the beginning I can choose five or 25 and you might think oh 25 is really good that's better than fives I should choose that but then of course you're going next and you're going to choose 100 and you'll win the game. You'll get you'll get more of the total value of coins so in this example a better strategy is to take the five because then the hundred is still in the middle. And so once I take five, you get to choose 10 or 25 at this point you'd probably prefer 25 because that's better than 10. But whichever you choose I can take the hundred and so I get 105 points and you'll get 35 points. Okay, good example for me.

So that's, that's easy for a simple example but in general, there are exponentially many strategies here at each step either of us could go left or right. I'm going to choose the left most or right most and I'm going to give a dynamic programming algorithm that just solves this fast. All right, so I think you understand the rules hopefully choose left most or right most coin alternating moves. So I'd like to define some sub problems. And this is a problem that's very naturally a substring problem. If I just looked at suffixes that would, that would deal great with if I'm deleting coins from the left but as soon as I delete.

If I delete coins from only the right right that would give me prefixes. But I'll tell you now there's no dynamic programming where the answer is suffixes and prefixes you can do suffixes or prefixes but if you need both, you almost certainly need a substring but as soon as I delete the first coin and then maybe you take the second coin. That's exactly the optimal strategy here. Now you have an arbitrary substring in the middle but substrings are enough because we're only leading from the ends. Okay, so we'll look at substrings. So more precisely, this is just the intuition.

Okay, we're going to define some generic X of I J is going to be what is the maximum total value I can get from this game if we play it on coins of value Vi to VJ. So that's a substring. So this is one way to write down the sub problems and it's also a good way in this case. You could write down a relation on on this definition of sub problems. I'd like to change it. Let's see.

I like to change just a little bit to give you I think what's a cleaner way to solve the problem, which is to add a third coordinate to my sub problems now it's parameterized parameterized by three things. P here only has two choices player it's it's me or it's you and this gets at a point that's maybe not totally clear from this definition. Max total value that I can get from these this the substring of coins. But this is not obviously what I need so obviously at the beginning I want the whole string and I want to know what my maximum value is fine. And I go first in this game I didn't specify but I go first. But as soon as I do a move as soon as I take the first coin for example it's now your turn.

And so I don't really know the maximum total value that I would get if I go first I'd like to say if player P goes first. I'd really like to know what happens in the case where you go first right. And so for some of the substrings I want to know what happens when you go first and for some of them I want to know what happens when I go first, because as soon as I make a move it's your turn and so we're going to flip back and forth between P being me and P being you. So don't see so you don't have to parameterize there's there's a way to write the recurrence otherwise. But this is I think a lot more intuitive because now we can do a very simple relation. So I'm going to split into two cases.

One is X of ij me and the other is X of ij you so X of ij me. So I so I have a substring from i to j what could I do, I could take the first coin or I could take the second coin which should I do that's my question what is my first move. Should I take the first coin or should I take the second point so this is my question. What is the first move. There are exactly two possible answers to that question so we can afford to just brute force them and take the max. If we're moving we want the maximum number of points we can get maximum total value of the two choices.

So if I take from the I side the left side, that would be X of i plus one j sorry and and now crucially we flip players because that it's your turn. And if I take from the j side it will make that will make j minus one. This is what. Okay, yeah, so split players so I shrink on the I side, or I shrink on the j side. Oh, I should add on here the value of the coin that I get and add on the value of the coin that I took right. This is an expression expression inside the max that some.

I take the max of those two options that will give that is my local brute force the best choice of how many. What are the total value of coins I will get out of the remainder given that you start plus this coin that I took right now in the first step. And for the two possible choices of what coin it is okay. Okay, what remains is how do we how do we define this X of i j you. It's a bit funnier but it's it's conceptually similar I'm going to write basically the same thing here but but with me instead of you because again it flips this is if you go first and the very next move will be me. So this is just a the symmetric formula here.

Now I don't put in the V. I don't put in the plus vi and I don't put in the plus vj here because if you're moving I don't get those points. So there's there's an asymmetry in this definition you could define it in different ways but but this is the maximum total value that I would get if you start. So and so in your first move you get some points but I don't get any points out of that. So there's no plus vi there's no plus vj. So it's just you either choose the ice coin or or you choose the jth coin and then the coins that remain for me shrink accordingly.

Now you're an adversary you're trying to minimize my score potentially because you're trying to maximize your score this is a zero sum game. So anything that you get I don't get if you want to maximize your score you're trying to minimize my score these are symmetric things. So you're trying to maximize your score this is a zero sum game. Now the right thing to to put in our in our formula here is is min from our perspective. We're imagining what's the worst case that could happen no matter what you do and we don't have control over what you do so we'd really like to see what score would I get if you choose the ice coin what score do you get if you choose the jth coin. So when we get to choose we're maximizing and this is a general two player phenomenon that when you choose we end up minimizing because that's the saddest thing that could happen to us.

Okay, so this is one way to write a recurrence relation we we of course have all of sort bot to do so the topological order here is increasing length of substance. So t is increasing j minus I start with empty string so base case is that X of I I me is vi so here I'm inconclusive on both ends in this definition. So there's a coin I can take at the end but if you move last and there's one coin left and I don't get it so it's zero. Then we have the original problem that is X zero and me that's the entire coin set starting with me. That's the problem that was the problem I wanted to do. And then running time we get is the number of sub problems that's data and squared because we're doing substrings times the amount of non recursive work I do here.

That's just a max of two numbers very simple constant time so this is quadratic. What we're really doing is sub problem expansion, and this is an idea that we will talk about more next lecture. And the idea is that sometimes you start with the obvious sub problems of prefixes sub fixes or substrings. Here the obvious version was was substrings because we were moving from both ends right. If you don't know probably suffixes or prefixes are enough. So we start there but sometimes that's still not enough sub problems here as soon as we made a move our problem was almost turned upside down because now it's your turn instead of my term and that that was just annoying to deal with and so we could whatever you run whenever you run into a new type of problem just build more sub problems as long as it stays polynomial number polynomial in number will get polynomial time.

And so so here we double the number of sub problems to just the the me case and the you case and and that made this recurrence really easy to write. Anyway, there's definitely messier ways ways to write it if you don't do that. In the examples we'll see next lecture we're going to talk a lot more about expansion maybe multiplying by the number of by the number of problems by an or n squared. And this will give us it will let us add more constraints to our sub problems like we did in the longest increasing subsequence. We added the constraint that we started that we start with a particular item. The more sub problems we have, we can consider more constraints because we'll just brute force all the possible constraints that could apply.

Okay, but we will see that more more next time. And I will see you next time.