Okay, today, today we're going to do MP completeness an entire field in one lecture should be fun. And we're going to look at a lot of different problems from Super Mario Brothers to jigsaw puzzles and show that they are NP complete. It's all about reductions. It's all about converting one problem into another, which is this kind of a fun, fun puzzle in and of itself. First I want to remind you of a few things that we learned at the beginning of the course and tell you what we need to do in order to prove all of those relations. So this is generally around the P versus NP problem.

So remember P is all the problems we know how to solve in polynomial time. Well, not just the ones we know how to solve, but also the ones that can be solved, I guess, which is mostly what we've looked at up until now. But for now, in the last couple of lectures, we'll be talking about problems that are probably not polynomial, polynomial solvable and what to do about those polynomial, as you know, is like n to the some constant polynomial is good exponential is bad. And what is n, I guess, n here is the size of the problem, which we'll have to be a little bit careful about today. And then NP is problems solvable in non deterministic polynomial time. And in this case, we need to focus on one particular type of problem, which is the decision problem.

Decision just means that the answer is either yes or no. So it's a single bit answer. We will see why we need to restrict to that kind of problem in a moment. So this is problems you can solve in polynomial time. Some notion of polynomials, it's the same, right? So same notion of polynomials, same notion of n.

But in a totally unrealistic model of computation, what that's a deterministic, sorry, a non deterministic model. In a non deterministic model, what you can do is say, instead of computing something from something you know, you can make a guess. So you could guess one out of polynomially many options in constant time. So normally in a constant time operation in regular models, like you add two numbers or you do an if that sort of thing, here we can make a guess. I give the computer polynomially many options I'm interested in. The computer is going to give me one of them.

It's going to give me a good guess. Guess, the guess is guaranteed to be good. And good means here that I want to get a yes answer if I can. So the formal statement is, if any guess would lead to a yes answer, then we get such a guess. So this is weird and it's asymmetric. It's biased towards yes.

And this is why we can only think about decision problems, yes or no. You could bias towards no. You get something else called co-np, but we'll focus on just np here today. So the idea is I really like to find a guess that leads to a yes answer. And the machine magically gives me, here is one, which means if I end up saying no, that means there was absolutely no path that would lead me to a yes. So when you get a no, you get a lot of information.

When you get a yes, you get some information, right? And let's go on. Here we go. So let's look at an example, 3SAT. SAT stands for satisfiability. So in 3SAT, the input of the problem looks something like this.

And in case you've forgotten that you're like weird logic notation, the carrot is an and and upside down carrot is an or. So in other words, I've given a formula, which is an and of ors. And each or clause has three things in it. These are called literals. And a literal is either a variable sub x sub i, or it's the negation of a variable x, not x sub i, right? So this is a typical example.

You could have no negations. You could have one negation, two negations, any number of negations per clause. These groups of three, these literals are called clauses and they are anded together. And my goal is this should be a decision question. So I have a yes or no question. And that question is, can you set the variables to true or false?

So each variable I get to choose a true or false designation such that the formula comes out true. Okay. So I want to set these variables such that every clause comes out true because they're anded together. So I have to satisfy each clause in one of three ways, right? We satisfy all three ways. And that is the three-sat problem.

This is a hard problem. We don't know polynomial time algorithm. There probably isn't one. But there is a polynomial time non-deterministic algorithm. So this problem is in NP because if I have lucky guesses, it's kind of designed to solve this kind of problem. What I'm going to do is guess whether x1 is true or false, okay?

So I have two choices. I'm going to ask my machine to make the right choice, whether it should be true or false. Then I'll guess x2. Each of these guess operations is going to take a constant amount of time, right? So I do it for each variable. And then I'm going to check whether I happen to satisfy the formula.

And if it comes out true, then I'll return yes. And if it comes out false, I return no. And because NP is biased towards yes answers, it always finds a yes answer if it can. If there's some way to satisfy the formula, then I will get it. If there's some way to make this formula come out true, then the algorithm will return yes. If there's no way to satisfy it, then this non-deterministic algorithm will return no.

And that's just kind of the definition of how non-deterministic machines work. It's a little weird, but you can see from this type of prototype of a non-deterministic algorithm, you can always arrange your guessing to be at the beginning. And then you do some regular polynomial time checking or deterministic checking. So when you rewrite your algorithm like this with guesses up front and then checking, you can also think of it as a verification algorithm. You can say, your friend claims that this three-sat formula is satisfiable, meaning there's a way to set the variable so that it comes out true. So this is called a satisfying assignment.

Satisfying just means make true, make it true. And you're like, wait, no, I don't believe you. And your friend says, no, no, no, really, it's true. Believe me. Here's how I can prove it. You set X1 to false.

You set X2 to true. You set X3, basically like they give you the guesses, right? And then you don't have to be convinced that those are the right guesses. You can check that it's the right guess. You can compute this formula in linear time and see what the outcome is, right? If someone tells you what the XIs are, you can very quickly see whether that was a satisfying assignment.

So you could call this a solution, and then there's a polynomial time verification algorithm that checks that the solutions are valid. But you can only do that for yes answers, right? Your friend says, no, this is not satisfiable. They have no way of proving it to you, right? I mean, other than checking all the assignments separately, which would take exponential time, there's no easy way to confirm that the answer to this problem is no. But there's an easy way to check that the answer is yes, right?

Namely, I give you the satisfying assignment. So this definition of NP is what I'll stick to. It's sort of, I like guessing because it's like dynamic programming, and I like dynamic programming. With dynamic programming, we also guess, and guessing actually originally comes from non-determinism. In dynamic programming, we don't allow this kind of model, and so we have to check the guesses separately, and so we spend a lot of time. Here, magically, you always get the right guess in only constant time.

So this is more about confirming that your problem is not totally impossible. At least you can check the answers in polynomial time. So let's go to NP completeness. Lots of definitions here. So if I have a problem X, it's NP complete if X is in NP and X is NP hard. If problem X is in NP hard, it means it's at least as hard as all problems in NP.

Intuitively, X means it's at least as hard as everything in NP. Yeah. Whereas being in NP is a positive statement. That's not too hard. At least there's a polynomial time verification algorithm. So being in NP is good news.

It says you're no harder than NP. NP hard says you're at least as hard as everything in NP. And so NP complete is a nice answer because this says you're exactly as hard as everything in NP, no harder, no easier. Now, there's a slight catch, which is we don't know whether P equals NP. So maybe those are the same, but probably not. We kind of have talked about this already in this course.

Unless you believe in luck, basically unless you imagine that a computer could engineer luck and always guess the right answer without spending a lot of time, then P does not equal NP. And in that world, what we get is that if you have an NP complete problem or actually any NP hard problem, you know it cannot be NP. So if you have the X as NP hard, then you know that X is not NP unless all of NP is NP. So unless P equals NP and most reasonable people do not believe that, you know, instead they believe that your problem is not polynomially solvable. So why is this true? Because if your problem is NP hard, it's at least as hard as every problem in NP.

And if you believe that there is some problem in NP, we don't necessarily know which one. If there is any problem out there in NP that is not NP, then X has to be at least as hard as it is. So it also requires non-polynomial time, something larger than polynomial time. What does at least as hard mean though? At least as hard as mean though. We're going to define it in terms of reductions.

Reduction from one problem to another is just a polynomial time algorithm, regular deterministic polynomial time that converts an input to the problem A into an equivalent input to problem B. Equivalent means that it has the same yes or no answer and will just be thinking about decision problems today. So why would I care about a reduction? Because it tells me that if I know how to solve problem B, then I also know how to solve problem A. If I have say a polynomial time algorithm for solving B and I want one for A, I just take my A input, I convert it to the equivalent B input, then I run my algorithm for B and it gives me the answer to A problem because the answers are the same. So if you have a reduction like this and if say B has a polynomial time algorithm, then so does A because you can just convert A into B and then solve B.

And this works for non-deterministic algorithms. So what this tells us is that in a certain sense, let's get this right, what this is saying, if I can solve B, then I can solve A. So this is saying that B is at least as hard as A. Yeah. Okay. Sometimes you have to think about that.

It's a little tricky. So if we want to prove the problem is NP hard, what we do is show that every problem in NP can be reduced to the problem of X. And so now we can go back and say, well, if we believe that there is some problem Y, that is in NP minus P. If there's something that's not NP, then we can take that problem Y and by this definition, we can reduce it to X because everything in NP reduces to X. And so then I can solve my problem Y, which is in NP minus P, converting it by converting it to X and solving X. So that means X better not have a polynomial time algorithm, because if it did, Y would also have a polynomial time algorithm.

And then in general, P would equal NP because every problem in NP can be converted to X. So if X has a polynomial time algorithm, then every problem Y does. It's sometimes tricky to get these directions right. So let's look at a handy guide on how to not make a mistake. Okay, maybe we're supposed to be here. What we care about from an algorithm perspective is proving that the problems are NP complete.

Because if we prove NP completeness, I mean, really, we care about NP hardness, but we might as well do NP completeness as well, right? Most of the problems that we see are NP hard, and they're also NP complete. So this is just a summary of our previous definitions. The first thing you do is prove that X is in NP. The second thing you do is prove that X is NP hard. And to do that, you reduce from some known NP complete problem or yes, NP hard, but we'll use NP complete to your problem X.

So to prove that X is in NP, sort of two approaches here, you can give a non deterministic polynomial time algorithm, or you could give a certificate and a verifier. There's no right or wrong certificate. I mean, a certificate you can define however you want as long as the verifier can actually check it. And when it says yes, then the answer to the problem was yes, right? So it's really the same thing. Just want to say there's some certificate that a verifier could actually check.

So that's proving that your problem is in NP. It's sort of an algorithmic thing, right? The second part is all about reductions. Now the definition says that I should reduce every problem in NP to my problem X. That's tedious because there's a lot of problems in the world. So I don't want to do it for every problem in NP.

I'd like to do it for just one. Now if I reduce sorting to my problem, that's not very interesting. It says my problem is at least as hard as sorting. But I already know how to solve sorting. But if I start from an NP complete problem, then I know by the definition that every problem in NP can be reduced to that problem. And if I show how to reduce the NP complete problem to me, then I know that I'm NP complete too.

Because if I have any other problems Z in NP, by the definition of NP complete of Y, I can reduce that to Y. And then if I can build a reduction from Y to X, then I get this reduction, right? And so that means I can convert any problem in NP to my problem X, which means X is NP hard. That's my definition. So all this is to say the first time you prove a problem is NP complete in the world, this happened in the 70s by Cook, actually. Basically, he proved that 3SAT is NP complete.

That was annoying because he had to start from any problem in NP. And he had to show that you could reduce to any problem in NP to 3SAT. But now that that work is done, our life is much easier, right? And in this class, all you need to think about is picking your favorite NP complete problem. 3SAT's a good choice for almost anything, but we'll, yeah. And then we'll reduce from that known problem to your problem that you're trying to prove is NP hard. And if you can do that, you know that your problem is NP hard.

So we only need one reduction for each hardness result, which is nice. So let's do some reductions. This is where things get fun, okay? So we're going to start with reducing 3SAT to Super Mario Brothers. I hope if you haven't played, you've seen it because we're going to rely on Super Mario Brothers physics, which I hope is very intuitive. And of course, this result holds for all versions of Super Mario Brothers so far released, I think.

The proofs are a little bit different for each one, especially Mario 2, which is in its own universe. What I'm going to talk about is the original Super Mario Brothers, the NES classic today. Now the real Super Mario Brothers is on a 320 by 240 screen. It's a little bit small. Once you go right, you can't go back left, right? So I need to generalize a little bit, because if you assume that the screen size of Super Mario Brothers is constant, in fact, you can dynamic program your way through and find the optimal solution in polynomial time.

So I need to generalize a little bit to arbitrary board size, arbitrary screen size. So in fact, my entire level will be in one screen, no scrolling, okay? Never mind, this is a side scrolling adventure. And so that's my generalized problem, okay? And I claim this is NP hard. If I give you a level and I ask you, can you get to the end of this level?

That problem is NP hard, okay? So how are we going to do this? We are going to reduce from 3SAT to Super Mario Brothers. So that means if I'm, I don't get to choose, right? I'm given a formula and I have to convert it into an equivalent Super Mario Brothers instance. So I have to convert it into a level, a hypothetical level of Super Mario Brothers, okay?

So given a formula, I have to build a level that implements that formula. So here's what it's going to look like. Okay, I'm going to start out somewhere. Here's my little Mario guy. First, it's going to enter a little black box we're going to call variable. This is supposed to represent, we'll call it X1.

It's some black box. I'm going to tell you what it is in a second. And it has two outputs, okay? There's the true output and the false output. And the idea is that Mario has to choose whether to set X1 to true or false, okay? So here is the variable gadget on the right here.

So he could enter from the left or the right. We'll need a couple of entrances in a moment and then he falls down, okay? Once Mario is down, if you check the jump height, you can't get back up. So that's one way. Once you're down, you have a choice. Should I fall to the left or fall to the right?

And if you make these falls large enough, once you fall, you can't unfall, okay? So once you make a choice of whether to leave on the true exit or the false exit, that's a permanent choice. I mean, if you're trying to solve the level, you don't know which way to go, you have to guess. So can I fall to the left or fall to the right or do something? So the existence of a play through this level is the same as saying there's a choice for the X1 variable. Now, we have to do this for lots of variables.

So there's an X2 variable, an X3 variable, and so on. Each one has a true exit and a false exit. So the level will actually have n instances of this if we have n variables. Now, what do I do once Mario decides that this is a true thing? What I'm going to do is have this thing called a gadget. In general, most NP hardness proofs use these things called gadgets, which is just saying we take various features of the input and we convert them into corresponding features on the output.

Okay? So here, I'm taking each variable X1, X2, X3, and so forth and building this little gadget for each of those variables, that picture shown here. Now, the other main thing you have in the three set are the clauses, right? We have triples of variables or their negations, and they have to come together and be satisfied. One of them has to be true. Okay?

So I have some clause gadget as well. So the idea is that some of the clauses have X1 in them, the true version of X1, not X1 bar. So for those clauses, I want to connect. We dip into those clauses briefly. And so the idea is that Mario makes a choice whether X1 is true or false. If X1 is true, Mario is going to visit all of the clauses that have X1 in them.

And then it's going to go to the X2 choice, then it's going to choose whether X2 is true or false and repeat, right? Once Mario, well, or I guess Mario decides X1 should be false, that will satisfy all the clauses that have X1 bar in them. And then again, we feed back into X2. Okay? So this is why we have two inputs in the X2 gadget. One of them is when the previous variable was true.

The other is when the previous variable was false. So the choice of X2 doesn't depend on the choice of X1. So they feed into the same thing, and you have to make your choice. So now the question is what's happening in these clauses, right? And then there's one other aspect which is after you've set all the variables at the very end, after the last variable Xn at the end, what we're going to do is come and go through the clauses, right? So here's all of the clauses.

The crossover gadget is a little bit more elaborate for the clauses. That's the clause gadget. So there are three ways to dip into the clause. It's actually upside down. Wait, wait, wait, wait. Let's go here first.

It's actually upside down relative to the diagram on the previous slide, but that's not a problem. So if Mario comes here where the aero is, what did I just say? If Mario comes here where the aero is, then he can hit the question mark from below. And inside that question mark is an invincibility star. And the invincibility star will just bounce up in that top section forever. Okay?

Unfortunately, all these are solid blocks. So Mario can't actually get up to the star, but as long as Mario can visit the first, second, or third question marks, then there will be at least one star up in the top section. So the idea is that each of these represents one of the literals that's in the clause. And if we choose, so let's do the first clause, X1 or X3 or X6 bar. So if we choose X1 to be true and then we follow the path, we'll be able to hit the first star, or we choose X3 to be true, then we'll come in here and we'll hit the second star. If we choose X6 to be false, then the path will, yeah, we'll be able to hit the third question mark and get the star up top.

So as long as we satisfy the clause, there will be at least one star. It won't help if we have multiple stars. Okay? Then the final traversal part. So that was the first clause. Now we're traversing through.

So now Mario is going to have to traverse this gadget from left to right on the top part, right? If there's a star, you collect a star and then run through all those flaming bars of death. If there's no star, you can't, you'll just die if you try to traverse. So in order to be able to traverse all the clauses, they must all be true. And them all being true is the same as their and being true, right? So you will be able to survive through all these clauses if and only if this formula has a satisfying assignment.

The satisfying assignment would be given to you by the level play. The choices that Mario makes in the variable gadget will tell you whether each variable should be true or false. Okay, so just to elaborate a little bit more in general, when you have a reduction like this to prove that it actually works, you need to check two things. You need to check that if there's a way to satisfy this formula, then there's a way to play the level. And then conversely, you need to show that if there's a way to play this level, the formula has a satisfying assignment. Okay?

So for the latter part, in order to convert a level play into a satisfying assignment, you just check which way Mario falls in each of the gadgets, left or right. That tells you the variable assignment. And because of the way the clauses work, you'll only be able to finish the level if there were at least like one star there. And stars run out after some time, so you can barely make it through all the flaming bars of death. Then you get to the next clause, so you need another star for each one. Excuse me.

Conversely, if there's a satisfying assignment, you can actually play through the level. You just make these choices according to what the satisfying assignment is. So either way, it's equivalent. We always get a yes or no answer here whenever we get a corresponding yes or no answer to the 3SAT process. So you also need to check that this reduction is polynomial size. It can be computed in polynomial time.

So there's an issue. Given this thing, you have to lay this out in a grid and draw all of our like wire paths, right? So what we need is called a crossover gadget now. And everywhere I have a crossing, I have a crossover. And this gadget has to guarantee that I can go through one way or the other. Excuse me, but there's no leakage from one path to the other path.

This is what we call in, we call it a unidirectional crossover. You can either go from the left or from the right. You can go from left to right or from top to bottom, bottom to top. You cannot get from the bottom right corner or bottom left. You can't get from the bottom right to left or left to bottom right, that kind of thing. So I'm told that Mario is only going to enter on the bottom left or the top left.

I only have to think about going in a particular direction. I can have falls to force Mario to only go one way. So let's say Mario comes in from the bottom left and he falls. So I can't backtrack. I can't jump back up. Then if Mario is big, he can break the blocks.

But if he's big, you won't be able to go through all those traversals as big Mario, right? So you can break the blocks, get up onto the top and leave. Or if big Mario enters from the top left, you can first take a damage, become small Mario, then you can fit through those wiggly blocks, right? But you cannot break blocks anymore as small Mario. So once you've committed to going small, you have to stay small until you get to that question mark. And then there's a mushroom in the block at the end.

So you can get big again, and then you can break the block and leave. But once you're big, you can't backtrack because big Mario can't fit through those tiny little traversals. So at the end, there has to be something that checks that you actually have a mushroom, right? So the only time you're allowed to take damage is briefly in this gadget, you take damage. If you tried to backtrack, you would get stuck. So yeah, there's a long fall here, then you have to get the mushrooms, you can escape again.

So at the end, there's like maybe a mushroom check kind of thing. So most of the time Mario's big. And just in these little crossovers, you have to make the decisions. This would make a giant level, but it is polynomial sized, probably quadratic or something. Therefore, Super Mario Brothers is NP hard. Okay.

So next topic is a problem you probably haven't heard about three dimensional matching. This is kind of a graph theory problem. We're going to call it 3dm for short. And you've seen matching problems based on flow matching problems are usually about pairs of things. You're pairing them up, which you might call two dimensional matching that can be solved in polynomial time. But if you change to two or three and you're tripling things up, then suddenly the problem becomes NP complete.

So it's a useful starting point similar to three set. So you're given a set of x elements, a set of y elements, a set of z elements, none of them are shared. But more importantly, you're given a bunch of triples. These are allowable triples. So we'll, we'll call the set of allowable triples T. And so we're looking at a cross product.

This is the set of all triples x, y and z, or x is in x, y is in y, and z is in z. But not all triples are allowed. Yeah, only some only some subset of triples is allowed. And your goal is to choose among those subsets. Sorry, sorry, among the triples of the, among the triples, a subset of the triples. Okay, so we're, we're trying to choose a subset S of t such that every element.

So the things in x, y and z are called elements. I'm just taking somebody in the union x, y, z, it should be in exactly one triple S in big S, right? You can think of this problem as you have seven like alien race with three colors, maybe you're whatever. Those are x, y, z. There's an equal number of each and every triple reports to you whether, whether they're in like a compatible color matching or something. So you're told upfront, you take a survey, there's, there's only n cubed different triples for each of them, they say, yeah, I, I match with that color.

So you're given that subset. And now your goal is to permanently triple up those guys. And everybody wants to be in exactly one triple. So everyone wants to be put in a triple, but only one triple. And the question is, is this possible? This is three dimensional matching, certainly not always going to be possible, but sometimes it is.

If it is, if you want to answer yes, if it's not possible, you want to answer no. This problem is NP complete. Why is it in NP? Because I can basically guess which elements of T are in S. There's, there's only at most n cubed of them. So for each one, if you guess yes or no, is that element of T in S, then I can check whether this convergent constraint holds, right?

So, so this is relatively easy to prove that this is NP. The challenge is that it's to prove that it's an NP hard. And we're going to do that again by reducing from three SAC. Okay. So we're going to make a reduction from three SAC to three dimensional matching. Direction is important.

Always reduce from the thing you know is hard and reduce to the thing you don't know is hard. Okay. So again, we're given a formula to, we skip one. There we go. And we want to convert that formula into an equivalent three dimensional matching input. So the formula has three variables and clauses for each variable.

We're going to put, we're going to build a gadget. Okay. And for each clause, excuse me, we're also going to build a gadget. So here is what they look like. Okay. If we have a variable X one, we're going to convert that into this picture.

So it looks pretty crazy at the moment. It's not too crazy. That's, this isn't supposed to be obvious. Okay. You have to think about it for a while. It's a puzzle to figure this kind of thing out.

But we're going to call this a variable gadget because locally, so there's basically a wheel kind of in the center here. And then there's dots for every, there's these extra dots for every pair of dots, like consecutive pairs of dots in a wheel. And what is drawn here is the set of triples that are allowed. So there's tons of other triples, which are forbidden. The triples that are in T are the ones that have these, these triangles in them, they're little triangles. And they're colored because there are exactly two ways to solve this gadget locally.

Okay. Now the outer dots are going to be connected to other gadgets, but the inner dots only exist in this gadget, which means they've got to be covered. Okay. They've got to be covered exactly once. And okay. Yeah.

So either you get to choose the blue triangles or you choose the red triangles, each of them will be exactly covered. You cover them once, right? Exactly once. You can't mix and match red and blue because you get, you either get overlap if you choose two guys that share a point or you'd miss one, right? They can't overlap at all. Everybody has to get covered.

So you, so just given these constraints locally, you can see you have to choose red or blue. One of them is true. One is false. Let's say red is true and blue is false. In general, what you're trying to build is a, when you're trying to build a variable gadget, you build something that has exactly two solutions. Okay.

One representing true, one representing false. Now, how big do we make the wheel big enough, right? You can make it as big as the number of clauses. You can make it into two and X one. So, and N is the number of occurrences of X one in the formula. I should have said that.

So, so this is the number of clauses that contain either XI or XI bar that's in XI. Okay. I'm going to double that because what we get is basically XI being true for the blue guys. Um, excuse me, sorry. And false for the red guys, right? So in order for XI to appear in say five different clauses, I want five of the true things and five of the false things.

And so I need to double in order to get potentially I have twice as many as I actually need, but this way I'm guaranteed to have false or true, whichever I really need, right? Okay. In reality, though, I have some true occurrences. I have some false occurrences, some X one, some X one bars. This will guarantee that I have enough of these free points to connect to any of my clause gadgets. Okay.

How do I do a clause gadget? It actually looks easier, right? So these would be pretty boring by themselves. Maybe there's some negations, right? I'm going to convert it into this picture. It's going to be XI dot and XJ bar dot and XK.

Again, the bottom two points only appear in this clause gadget. The top points are actually the dots in the variable gadget picture. So there's one of these pictures for X one, there's another for X two, X three, and so on. These things are all connected together in this pattern. But the point is that within this gadget, I only have three allowed triples. And these points only appear in this gadget, which means they have to be covered in this gadget.

They can be covered by the left triple or the right triple or the middle triple. But once you choose one, you can't choose the others, which this means if I set X one to be true, it leaves behind the points marked true. If I choose the like the red things, for example, then the blue points are left behind. Leaving points behind is this, in this case, is going to be good because this clause in order to satisfy this clause, in order to choose one of these triples, at least one of them must be left behind by the wheel, right? If all of these are covered by their wheels, then there's no way I can't choose any of these. But if at least one of these is left behind by the wheel, then I can choose the corresponding triple and uncover the points.

So I'll be able to cover these points if and only if at least one of those arguments is true. And that's a clause. That's what a clause is supposed to do in three set. If at least one of those is true, then the clause is satisfied. I need all the clauses to be satisfied because I need to cover one of these points for all the instances of these clauses. So that's how it works.

So this makes the proof messy, but I want to move on to somewhat simpler proofs for the other problems. I did not come up with this proof. Gary and Johnson, I think, I think, yeah, this is Gary and Johnson proof. So there's a cool book from the late like 70s by Gary and Johnson, and they do a lot of NP completeness if you're curious. So hopefully you believe three dimensional matching is hard. Now I'm going to use it to prove that some very different types of problems are hard.

This is kind of a graph theory problem. So in in the world, most NP harness proofs are reductions from three sat or some variation of three sat. So in some sense, you can think of three dimensional matching as kind of like a version of three sat, but it's a little more stringent. And that stringency helps us to do other reductions. So another problem where we'll reduce from three dimensional matching is called subset sum. And I think we've talked about this actually a little bit already this semester.

So you're given n integers a one up to a n, and you're given a target sum, also an integer call it T. And what you'd like to know is, is there a subset of the integer that adds up to that target? Can you choose a sum of the integers so that so some of some of T, right? This is written as a sum of T. But what this means is the sum over the AIs that are in s. When I say some of T, I meant some of us.

So this is some of us. What this means is the sum over the AIs that are in s of the value AI, I want that to equal T. Okay. So I give you a bunch of numbers, do any subset of them add up to T. That's all this is asking. This problem is NP hard, it's NP complete.

In fact, when you can guess which integers should go in the subset, and then add them up to see if you got it right. It's NP hard, but it's something special we call weekly NP hard. And let's look at the proof. Okay, it's actually really easy. Now that we have this three dimensional matching problems. So these numbers are going to be huge.

What we're going to say is, so again, we're given a three dimensional matching instance, we get the directions, right? We're given a set of triples. We want to solve this problem by reducing it to subset sum. So we get to construct integers that represent triples. Okay, that's what we're going to do. So here we go, we get, we get to choose a number.

So I'm going to think of them in a particular base B, which is going to be one plus the max of the M XIs. So again, this is the number of occurrences of the variable XI in a true or false form. Okay, so I take the maximum occurrence of any variable, add one, that's my base, it just has to be large enough. And this is basically the entire reduction in one line. If I have, if I have three triples, if I have triple XI, XJ, XK, I'm going to convert that into a number that looks like this where the one positions are, I don't really know the order, but they are I, J and K, everything else is a zero. And this is in base B, not base two, it's a little weird, all of my digits are zero or one, but I'm in base B.

And three of the digits are one, and the rest are zero. Okay, why? Because of my target sum, the target sum is going to be one, one, one, one, one, one, one. So this number in algebra, you write this as B to the I plus B to the J plus B to the K, this, this, you would write as the sum of B to the I for all I, right? So maybe you see why this works, it's actually really simple. Once you see it, for this instance, my goal is to choose a subset of these numbers that add to the one, one, one, one, one number.

How could that possibly happen? Well, I've got to choose every time I choose one of the numbers, those three digits get set to one in my sum. If I ever have a collision, if I add two ones together, I'm going to get a two. That's not good, because once I get a two, I'll never be able to get back to a one, because my base is really big. This base is designed so that the total, this is the total number of colliding ones. So we set it to one larger than that, which means you'll never get a carry when you're adding up in this space.

And that's why I set the base to be something large, not base two, base two might work, but this is much safer. So what that means is for each of these ones in the target sum, I've got to find a triple that has those ones, and those triples can't overlap. So that means choosing a set of numbers that add up to this is exactly the same as choosing a set of triples that covers all of the elements. Done. Super easy once you have the right problem, right? Now, why do I call this weekly NP hard?

Because these numbers are giant. If I have n elements in x, y, z, I guess they're called x, x, y, k, z, k. If I have n of those elements in x union, y union, z, the number of digits here is n. So the number of digits in is in order n, right? That's fine from an NP completeness standpoint. This is polynomial size.

The number of digits in my numbers is a polynomial. And this base is also pretty small. So if you wrote it out in binary, it would also be polynomial. So just lost the log factor, right? But the size of the numbers, the actual values of the numbers is exponential with weak NP hardness, that's allowed. With strong NP hardness, that's forbidden.

In strong NP hardness, you want the values of the numbers to be polynomial. So in this case, the number of bits is small, but the actual values are giant because you have to exponentiate. It would be cool. And this problem is only weekly NP hard. Maybe you actually know a pseudo polynomial time algorithm for this. It's basically a knapsack.

If these numbers have polynomial value, then you can basically, in your sub problems in a dynamic programming, you can write down the number t and just solve it for all values of t. And it's easy to solve it in polynomial time, polynomial in the integer values. So we call that pseudo polynomial because it's not really polynomial. It's not polynomial in the number of digits that you have to write down the number, right? It's polynomial in the values. Weak NP hardness goes together with pseudo polynomial.

That's kind of a matching result. Say, look, pseudo polynomial is the best you can do. You can't hope for a polynomial because if you let the numbers get huge, then the problem is NP complete. But if you force the numbers to be small, then this problem is easy. So subset sum is a little funny in that sense. Okay.

Let's go to another problem, partition. So partition is pretty much the same setup. I'm given n integers. Let's say they're positive. And I want to know, is there a subset? I'm not given a target sum t.

Target sum is basically forced. What I would like is the sum of all the values in s to equal the sum of all the values, not in s. That's a minus s, which in other words is going to be the sum of all values in a divided by two. So this is called partition because when you're taking a set, you're splitting into two halves of equal sum. Every element has to go in one of the two halves, and they're called s and a minus s, like cuts in the flow stuff, right? And you want those two halves to have exactly the same sum, which means they will be the sum divided by two.

So that better be even. Otherwise, it's not going to be possible. So again, you want to decide whether this is possible or impossible. Yes or no, right? I claim this problem is also weekly NP complete, and we can reduce from subset sum to partition. This is a little interesting because partition is actually a special case of subset sum, which means this problem is easier than subset sum, no, harder.

Yeah. Anyways, in other words, I can reduce partition to subset sum. I just compute this value, set that to T, and then leave the A's alone. That will reduce partition to subset sum, but that's not the direction I want, right? I want to reduce from subset sum. A problem I can prove is NP complete to partition because I want to prove that partition is NP complete.

So in this case, there's an easy reduction in both directions. This direction is a little harder. So reduction from subset sum. So I'm given a bunch of AIs. I'm not going to touch them, and I'm given a target sum T, and I basically want to make that target sum into a half, right? So to do that, I'm going to add two numbers to my set.

So I'm going to let sigma be the sum of the given A's. And then I'm going to add, so I'm given A1 through An. I'm going to add an, yeah, I'm going to add An plus 1. It's going to be sigma plus T, and I'm going to add An plus 2 to be 2 sigma plus T. Why? So these are two basically huge numbers because sigma is, I mean, it's the sum of all the numbers, so it's bigger than all of them, right?

And so imagine for a moment that I put those two in the same side of the partition. I put them both in S or I put them both out of S. Their sum by themselves is three sigma. The T's cancel. Whereas all the other items, their sum is sigma. So I'm host, right?

If I have three sigma on one side and a sigma on the other, I'm not going to make them equal. So in fact, these two elements have to be on opposite sides. So there's a side that has sigma plus T. There's a side that has two sigma plus T. And then there's all the other N items. So some of them are going to go to one side.

Some are going to go to the other side. Their total value is sigma. Right now, this is close to sigma. This is close to two sigma. So they have to kind of meet in the middle, right? In fact, what you have to do is add sigma minus T and think about it for a second, right?

If I add sigma minus T, that would come out to two sigma. If I add T to the other side, that comes out to two sigma. That would be good because they're equal. But notice that this is sigma minus T. This T, right? Their sum is sigma.

So in order to solve this slightly larger partition problem, you actually have to solve the subset sum problem because you have to construct a subset that adds up to T. T was an arbitrary given value. So this is pretty nifty. We're adding some values so that the new target sum is the 50-50 split when we're given some values that have an arbitrary target sum. So partition is weekly NP complete. A lot, a lot going on today.

Do some Google searches, if you need, check the reference textbooks. These are great concepts, but they do take some time and practice to understand. So you don't need to understand after today's lecture by any means. You can definitely practice more to understand. The examples we went through today are a little bit more intense and involved. I might post just some easier, more elementary examples to look at as well so that you feel you can get a good handle on this because reductions are important in real world stuff.

So see you next time.