Okay. Okay, today we're going to in one lecture cover an entire field, which is computational complexity. It's sort of, it meets algorithms in an interesting way, which is algorithms is mostly about solving how to solve problems, well, and showing you showing showing that you can solve a problem well. And computational complexity is more about the lower bound side, proving that proving that you can't prove you can't solve a problem very well. You can't find a good algorithm to solve it. We've seen a little bit about lower bound several lectures ago, proving surge and sorting lower bounds in a bounded branching decision tree model.

But these are much stronger notions of badness. This is not about n versus n log n or constant versus log n. This is about polynomial versus exponential, which has been sort of the bread and butter model in this class so far. polynomial is a good running time. And we've always strive for that exponential is usually pretty trivial to get. And so we're, we're going to talk about some different, they're called complexity classes that talk about this issue in different ways to prove hardness. This is a pretty high level lecture.

So you're not going to be expected to prove hardness, but you'll get kind of an idea of what it's like. One, one result will, will prove today is that most problems actually have no algorithm, which is kind of shocking and, and some other fun things. So let's get started here with, with the notion of P. This is the set of all problems solvable in polynomial time. We talked about what polynomial time means a bunch last lecture. So let's just recall that that polynomial time means polynomial in the problem size, which I'll denote here as n, the number of words in your input.

Okay, so these, these are problems that are efficiently solvable. P is the set of all of them. And for contrast, X is the set of all problems solvable in exponential time. It's the problem solvable in exponential time, right? Exponential here means something like two to the end, two, two to the end to the constant. That's one reasonable definition of exponential.

So, so just the exponentiation of this of polynomial. So as you might expect, most every problem that we've talked about in this class so far can be solved in exponential time rather easily. And algorithms in some sense is about distinguishing these two, which problems are in P versus are in say X, X minus P. So let's formalize this a little bit. Let's look at a picture, which is a bit of a simplification of reality. But for purposes of this class, we'll do just fine.

And I think it's a really helpful way to think about things, which is to have a big access for a single access for how hard is your problem? What is the difficulty of solving your problem? So the easiest problems are over on the left. And each problem is is a dot on the axis, right, is a little line on the axis. Hardest problems are way down towards the right side. So P, I'm just going to call this segment upfront.

And then I'm going to have a bigger thing for, for exponential time. So this is just to say that P is nested inside XP. Every problem that can be solved in polynomial time can also be solved in exponential time, because polynomial is less than or equal to exponential. These are just upper bounds being being an X means you're somewhere from that line to the, to the left being in P, means you're somewhere from from our other smaller line to the left in terms of difficulty. But formally, we could write P is contained in XP as sets. In fact, they're they're also known to be different from each other.

The there are problems that can be solved in exponential time that cannot be solved in polynomial time. For example, n by n chess is in exponential time, but not in polynomial time. So what is the n by n chess problem? This is I give you an n by n chess board, I describe to a position. Here's where all the white pieces are. Here's where all the black pieces are.

You can have an arbitrary number of queens and bishops and pawns of each color. You can, yeah, you can have an arbitrary number of queens and bishops, pawns of each color, and of course, up to n squared of them, so they don't overlap each other. And I want to know, does white win from this position? Let's say it's it's white's move can white win. And the problem can be solved in exponential time by exploring the entire tree of all possible games. But it cannot, you cannot, you can prove that it cannot be solved in polynomial time.

So that's a nice example. More positive example, so to speak, is is negative weight cycle detection. Negative weight cycle detection is I give you a graph, a directed graph was weights, and I want to know, does it have a negative weight cycle? Yes or no. And this problem is in p, because we saw a polynomial time algorithm for this, right? You run Bellman-Ford on an augmented graph.

So this is an example of a problem we know how to solve. This whole class is full of examples that we know how to solve in polynomial time. But this is a nice non-trivial and succinct one to phrase. It's also an example of a decision problem. A lot of basically all the problems I'll talk about today are decision problems. Like we talked about last class meaning the answer is just yes or no.

Can white win from this position? Yes or no. Is there a negative weight cycle? Yes or no. Tetris, we can also formulate as a problem. This is a version of Tetris that we might call perfect information Tetris.

Suppose I give you a Tetris board. It has some garbage left over from your past playing or maybe it started that way. And I give you the sequence of n pieces that are going to come. And I want to know, can I survive this sequence of n pieces? Can you place all, can you place each of these pieces as they fall such that you never overflow the topples of the board on any n by n board? This problem can be solved in exponential time, but we don't know whether it can be solved in polynomial time.

We'll talk about that more in a second. It's a problem that very likely is not NP, but we can't actually prove it yet. All right, so there's one other class I wanted to find at this point. We'll get to a fourth one also in a bit. But R is the class of all problems that can be solved in infinite time. So very, very general.

This should include everything that we care about. And it's bigger than X, but it includes problems that take doubly exponential time or whatever. So I will draw a region for R here. So everything that includes P, it includes X. And so we have containment but not equal to R when we're defining our sets here. There's of course many classes between.

You could talk about problems that take double a exponential time. And that would have, that would be between them, right? Or there's also between P and X, but there's a lot of different things. We'll talk about one of them. But before we get to the finer side of things, let's talk about R a little more. So we have a nice example being computational complexity theory.

Or I guess this is usually just called theoretical computer science, right? It has a problem. And this class is all about problems that are in P, which is very easy. But in fact, there are other problems way out beyond R. And one such problem, we won't prove it here today. It takes a whole lecture just to prove this.

It's given a computer program. Does it ever halt? Does it ever terminate? This would be a great thing if we knew how to solve. It's basically an infinite loop detector. If your problem doesn't halt, then it has an infinite loop of some sort.

And you'd like to tell your user, hey, you have a bug in your program. So this is one part of bug detection. And it's impossible. There's no algorithm that solves all inputs to this problem. Maybe given one problem that say has zero lines of code, it could solve that. It says, yeah, that one terminates.

And maybe you can detect simple kinds of infinite loops. So there's some inputs, some computer programs that you could detect. But there's not one algorithm that solves all inputs. This is kind of sad news. We call such problems uncomputable. This is just another word for being not in R.

And the next thing I'd like to do is prove to you that most decision problems are uncomputable or sketch or proof. So remember, decision problems are problems where the answer is just yes or no. This is a very special kind of problem. And even those, almost all of them cannot be solved. So halting is an example of a problem we can't solve. This whole class, this 381 is about problems we can solve.

But today I'm going to show you that actually those are in the minority. Most problems cannot be computed. This is very strange, also a little depressing. So we'll talk more about this in a moment. First, let me argue why this is the case. So I'm going to be a little informal about what exactly is a computer program and what exactly is a decision model.

But roughly all I need to do, the only level of precision I need is just to count how many there are. What is a computer problem? Well, it's usually a file. What is a file? It's like a string of characters. What's a character?

It's a string of bits. So a program is just in the end a string of bits, finite string of bits. We all understand that. Whatever language you define in the end, every program is just a string of bits. And a string of bits, we can translate into a number. So we can convert between strings of bits and numbers.

When I say number, I mean what's usually called a natural number or a non-negative integer. So this is just 0, 1, 2, and so on. Now, what about decision problems? Decision problem is a specification of what we want to solve. So we can think of that as saying for every input is the answer yes or no. That's literally what a decision problem is.

The only question is what is an input? And we've talked about inputs and the size of inputs. There's a lot of different ways to measure them. But in the end, we can just think of an input as a string of bits also. It's just a file. So a decision problem is a function from inputs to yes or no.

And inputs, we're going to say, well, that's a string of bits, which we can associate with a number in n. So here we can start to tie things together. So in other words, a program is a finite string of bits. And a problem is in some sense an infinite string of bits because there are infinitely many possible inputs. And for each of them, we specify yes or no. So this is basically an infinite string of bits.

So we can imagine 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, infinitely. Just for every string of bits, we can say, okay, if your input is the number 0, here's the answer. No, if your input is the number 1, then the answer is yes. If your input is the number 2, your answer is yes and so on down the line, right? Every infinite string of bits corresponds to exactly one decision problem, which specifies for every possible input integer, which corresponds to a string of bits. What is the answer?

Yes or no. So this may seem subtle, or it may seem like not a big deal, but mathematics has well studied this problem. In infinite strings of bits, there are many of them, infinitely many. It's not the prying, they're also infinitely many integers. So maybe it doesn't seem that deep, but there's a difference in infinitude. Programs and integers are countably infinite.

And infinite strings of bits are called uncountable. I think the most intuitive way to see this is an infinite string of bits. If I put a decimal or a binary point in front, that would encode a real number between 0 and 1. So this is roughly a real number in 0, 1. And when I'm writing equal on the slide here, I, this really goes both directions, right? Given a decision problem, I can define a string of bits, of course, you know, giving me an answer for all inputs, and I can convert that into a real number between 0 and 1.

But also the other direction, if I take any real number that is a corresponding decision, there is a corresponding decision problem. These are one to one bijection, bi-direction, right, between them. And the bad news is real numbers are uncountable and natural numbers are countable, which means there's a lot more of them. So one way you might phrase this is informally, the number of natural numbers is way smaller than the number of real numbers. And so from that, we derive that most problems are unsolvable, because every problem solves exactly one decision problem. We can also run a program conceptually on all the possible inputs, and we'll figure out what function, we will figure out what function at solving, right?

And if we don't allow random numbers in our program, which I'm not here, then every program solves exactly one decision problem. Possibly it's even worse for us because multiple programs probably solve the same decision problem. Anyway, they add irrelevant lines of code or they don't do anything different, or you run Belman-Ford versus Belman-Ford five times and you'll get the same result, right? And that's actually the bad direction for us. We'd like to know whether there's a program that solves every decision problem. There's no assignment of programs to problems because there's just too many problems.

So when I first saw this result, I was shocked and dismayed that, well, why are we even doing computer science if most problems can't be solved? Luckily, it seems most of the problems we care about can be solved, and that's what this class hopefully shows you and helps you see. And in fact, even the problems that seem really, really hard for us to solve, like end-by-end chess, where we can prove that it takes exponential time, there is an algorithm to solve chess. It's just really slow. And this is a statement about most problems can be solved in finite time, no matter how much time you give them. So it's not all bad.

Luckily, most problems we care about are in R, that finite. And I don't know why this is sort of a mystery of life, but it's good news, or it's why we keep persevering, trying to solve problems with algorithms, right? Okay, I want to add one more class to our picture, which is NP here. Okay. And nestles in between P and X, so we know that P is contained in or equal to NP. And NP is contained in or equal to X.

But what is this class? A couple different ways to define it, you might find one way or the other more intuitive. They're equivalent. So as long as you understand at least one of them, it's good. And P is just a class of decision problems. So I define P and X and R arbitrary.

They can be problems with any kind of output, but NP only makes sense for decision problems. And it's going to look almost like the definition of P, problem solvable and polynomial time, we've just restricted to decision problems, but we're going to allow a strange kind of computer or algorithm, which we'll call a lucky algorithm. This is going to relate to the notion of guessing that we talked about the last four lectures in dynamic programming. With dynamic programming, we said, oh, there are these different choices I could make, what's the right choice? I don't know. So I'd like to make a guess.

And what that meant in terms of a real algorithm is we tried all the possibilities, and then we took the max or the or or whatever over all those possibilities. But what we were simulating is something that I'll call a lucky algorithm, which can make guesses and could always make the right guess. This is a computer that is impossible to buy. It would be great if you could buy a computer that's lucky, but we don't know how to build such a computer. So what does this mean? So informally, it means your algorithm can make lucky guesses, and it always makes the right guess.

Whereas in dynamic programming, we had to try all the options and spend time for all of them. The lucky algorithm only has to spend time on the lucky guess on the correct guess. More formally, this is called a non deterministic model of computation. And this N is the N and non deterministic is the N for NP. So this is non deterministic polynomial time. So algorithm can make guesses and then in the end, it should output yes or no.

Let's, well, like, like if you're exploring a maze, this algorithm could say, should I go left or right? I'm going to, I'm going to guess whether to go left or right. Then let's say a guess is left. And so then it just goes left and then it reaches another junction. It says, should I go left or right? And it'll say guess, it'll guess right this time.

And in the end, if I get to some dead end, maybe, and I say, and I say no, or if I get to the destination, I'm trying to get, and I say yes. So that is a non deterministic algorithm. And what does it mean to run the algorithm? What does it mean for the guesses to be lucky? The guesses are guaranteed. Which way you end up going is guaranteed to lead you to a yes if there is one, if possible, right?

So in my maze analogy, if my destination is reachable from my source, then I'm guaranteed whenever I guess left or right, I will choose a path that leads me to my destination. Whereas if the destination is in some disconnected part of the maze and I can't get there, then I don't know what the guesses do. It doesn't really matter because no matter what I do, I'll end up in a dead end and say no. That's the model. As long as you have an algorithm that always outputs yes or no in polynomial time, because we're only talking about polynomial time, lucky algorithms. If there's any way to get a yes, then your machine will magically find it without having to spend any time to make these decisions.

It's a pretty magical computer and it's not a computer that exists in real life, but it's a computer that's great to program on. It's very powerful. You could solve lots of things with it. Question to think about. If you have this magical computer, it can guess whether it's a yes or no. Why doesn't it just answer the question then?

Think about that for a second. Okay. So what if we... So a nice check is, does this make all problems trivial, all decision problems? Maybe I should say, well, I don't know whether the answer to the problem is yes or no. So I'll just guess yes or no.

This is problematic because I might say, it will guess A or B. And if I choose the A option, I'll output yes. If I choose the B option, I'll output no. In this model, that algorithm will always output yes. Because what it's saying is, if there's a way to get a yes answer, I'll do it that way. And so such an algorithm that tries to cheat and just guess the whole answer to the problem will actually end up always saying yes, which means it doesn't solve a very interesting problem.

It only solves the problem, which is represented by the bit vector 1111 where the answers are always yes. Okay. So let's do an example, a real example of such an algorithm that is useful, which is Tetris. So I claim Tetris is an NP because there's a lucky algorithm and a non-deterministic polynomial time algorithm that can solve the Tetris game. So again, you're given a board, you're given some sequence of pieces, and you want to know whether there's some way to place the pieces that let's you survive. And so what I'm going to do is, for each piece, I'm going to guess how to place it.

So for the first piece, I'm going to guess how far left or right do I move it, and then I let it fall one step. Maybe I rotate it. I choose a sequence of moves among left, right, up, what are left, right, down, rotate, right, rotate, left. And all along the way, I check, is that move valid? If the move is invalid at any point, I just say return no. And then if a piece gets nestled into a good spot, I continue on to the next piece.

I do the same thing, guess all the possible things I could do to that. Again, I only need to guess one bit at a time, and I'll only need to do a polynomial number of guesses, like a linear number of guesses for each piece about where it falls in. So maybe a quadratic number of guesses overall. And then at the end, if I survived, oh, I also have to check if a line clears, right, then I clear that line. And if in the end I survive, I return yes. So this is a non-deterministic algorithm.

So I would say check the rules of the game. And if we survive, return yes. And if at any point we violate the rules, for example, go off the top of the board, we return no. So this is an algorithm that sometimes returns no, and sometimes returns yes, depending on what choices you make. And this model guarantees if there's any way to get to a yes, it will find it. If I swapped these, if I swapped the answers, if I returned yes when I violated the rules, and I turned no if I survived, that would be an uninteresting algorithm, because it's very easy to lose in Tetris.

The hard part is to survive. If I say, is there any way to just play the game in such a way that I violate the rules, then of course the answer is yes, right? You can just stack up the pieces and go right off the top. There's an asymmetry in this definition of yes versus no. It always finds yes answers if possible. It doesn't always find no answers if possible.

So it's very important the way that I wrote these questions. It's important that I define Tetris as the problem of can I survive? The problem of can I not survive? Is it is it impossible to survive? That's a different question. That problem is not in NP probably.

Okay, so slight subtlety there. Yes versus no. Let me give you the other definition of NP. So this one's confusing, which although I prefer this definition sometimes, most people do not. Another definition is that NP is a set of decision problems that can be checked in polynomial time. This actually came up last lecture where we talked about subset sum.

I said, here's a bunch of integers. Here's a target integer. And I can prove to you that this integer can be represented as a sum of numbers from my subset of numbers in my set because here they are, right? I gave you this. I gave you, you know, this plus this plus this equals the target sum. And so that solution in some sense, that can be checked for a yes example.

If I can represent my number as a subset sum or a given set, it's easy for me to prove that to you. And you can check it just by adding up the numbers and checking for that each, checking that each number was in the set. Whereas no instances, I had an example of a target sum that could not be reached. And the only reason I knew that is because I had brute force the whole thing. And there's no succinct way to prove to you that that number can't be represented. A similar thing with Tetris, what I would say is since, okay, so we have a version one and a version two now for Tetris is that a certificate for a yes input of Tetris is a sequence of moves for the pieces.

Okay, so if it's possible to survive in Tetris, I can prove it to you. I can just play the game and show you that I survived. No answers. I don't know. It's hard to prove to you that I can't survive the given sequence of pieces. But yes, answers are easy.

I just show you here's the sequence of button presses I'll do for this piece, and then for this piece, and then for this piece. Notice it's exactly the same thing that I guessed in the beginning of our version one algorithm. And then I did some other work to implement the rules. And similarly, if I gave you a certificate, which is the things that I wanted to guess of how to play the game, I can check the certificate by just implementing the rules of Tetris and seeing whether I survived. And if you violate the rules at any point, you say no. And if you survive, you return a yes.

That's what's called a verification algorithm. So let me formalize this notion. Let me, okay, yeah, so, so given a problem input plus a certificate like the one that we talked about, right? There, there is a polynomial time. So, so this is another definition. This is what I mean by this definition of NP verification algorithm that satisfies two properties.

One is for every yes input. So, so every input where the answer is yes to the problem, there exists a certificate such that the verifier says yes. So this is saying it's possible to prove to me that the answer is yes. Because if you ever have an output that happens that the answer happens to be yes, you can prove it to me by giving me a certificate. There's always some certificate that proves the answer is yes, because the verifier which, which runs in regular polynomial time, this is a regular old fashioned downer verification algorithm, polynomial time in, in our usual sense, right? It will say yes.

And furthermore, furthermore, the yes answers from the verifiers are actually meaningful because if I ever get to a no input, it always says no no matter what certificate I give it. So this should really formalize what all this means. It's equivalent to the previous definition. This is saying that proofs exists for yes instances. And this is saying that proofs don't exist for no instances, meaning there are no false proofs. So the verifier ever outputs yes, you know that the answer to your problem is a yes.

But if it outputs no, you're not sure. Maybe you got the certificate wrong, because we only know that there's some certificate where the verifier will say yes. Or maybe it was no input. And then it doesn't matter what certificate you used. But it's nice because it says on say Tetris, if I give you the sequence of pieces, it's very easy to write down a verifier, which just implements the rules of Tetris. And so then you can at least check whether a solution is valid in the yes case.

In the no case, we don't have anything useful. So NP is a structure, some additional structure about the yes inputs in your problem. And a lot of decision problems are in NP. A lot of the problems that we care about can be phrased as an NP problem. As long as it's a decision problem, usually answering yes or no is provable, like subset some like Tetris. These are problems where if the answer is yes, I can give you a convincing proof why.

And it turns out so a lot of problems fall into this NP setting. And so we have some tools for talking about problems being hard with respect to NP. Let me first talk a little bit about P does not equal NP. Sorry, let's talk a little bit about P, right? On the slide here in the bottom, we're talking about a lot of people conjecture that P does not equal NP. It's sort of a standard conjecture in theoretical computer science.

Maybe you've read about it or heard about it. But we don't know how to prove whether P equals NP or does not equal NP. And so in this picture, I've drawn the hypothesis, which is that NP is a strictly bigger region than P is. But we don't actually know whether there are problems in this region, right? We don't know whether there are any problems in the region between NP and X. We conjecture there are problems here and here shown by the question marks.

But there's definitely problems in our other realms that we know about because we know P does not equal X. But we don't know whether P equals NP and we don't know whether P equals X. If you could prove that P does not equal NP or just prove it, you would be famous for the rest of time if you could ever prove this. It's sort of the core problem in theoretical computer science, how to prove P does not equal NP. But for the most part, we just assume it. Now, what does this conjecture mean?

It essentially means the way I like to say this is you cannot engineer luck because NP problems are problems you can solve by lucky algorithms. P are problems you can solve by regular old algorithms. If P equaled NP, it means luck doesn't buy you anything, which seems weird. If I can magically make these super powerful guesses, then I can solve the problem that's NP. That seems super powerful, way more powerful than regular algorithms, where we have to actually brute force and try all the choices. It seems pretty solid that P does not equal NP.

That's my, of course, we don't know how to prove it. Another phrasing that it's harder to come up with proofs than it is to check them from a mathematical perspective. This is equivalent to P does not equal NP. That's why you should believe it. The next notion is NP hardness. In particular, I want to claim this.

This is a theorem that exists in lots of literature that if P does not equal NP, then Tetris is not NP. I said earlier Tetris is an X, but we don't know whether it's in NP. But in fact, we conjecture that it is not NP because we conjecture that P does not equal NP. If you could prove this conjecture, and there's a lot of theorems that are conditioned, assuming P does not equal NP, then we get some really nice results like Tetris cannot be solved in polynomial time. It cannot figure out whether I can win a Tetris game in polynomial time in the input size. Why?

Well, this is just a consequence of another theorem, which is that Tetris is NP hard. I'm going to define NP hard informally first, and then I'll define it slightly more formally in a second. But this means roughly that Tetris is as hard as all problems in NP. Let me add to our picture here. NP hard is the part shown at the top now. Right underneath, there's another region here for X part.

Your problem being in NP was a positive result. It says you're no more difficult than that line where our bracket goes to. You're either at this position or to the left. Being in P was also a positive statement. It says you're here or to the left. Being in P is better than being in NP because it's a subset of that.

NP hard is a lower bound. It says you're at this point, at this level of difficulty, or to the right. And so it goes from that line at the end of our bracket here to infinity in difficulty. And X part says you're at least as hard as the right extent of the X set, or you're harder than that in a sense that we'll formalize in a moment. And this bolded place marked with an arrow, as you might imagine, is kind of interesting. It's exactly where NP meets NP hard.

This thing is called NP complete. You've probably heard about NP completeness, a famous notion. And this is what it means. It is the problems that are in NP. So they have a lucky algorithm that solves them. They can be verified.

There are certificates that can be verified, and they are NP hard. So they're in NP, and they are the hardest among problems in NP. Now, they're not the hardest problem. There are actually many problems right here at this single level of difficulty called NP complete. Among them is Tetris. There are many others which we can talk about in a moment.

So that is NP completeness. So because these problems are the hardest problems in NP, if there's any problems here in between in NP minus P, then these must be among them. And so if you assume that P does not equal NP, like most people do, then you know that all problems at this right most extreme of NP, the hardest problems in the NP, they must not be NP. And that's why I can say if P does not equal NP, Tetris is not NP. And also any NP complete problem is not NP. So a lot being thrown around here.

Okay, so what does as hard as mean? This is our good friend reductions here. We talked about reductions a lot in this class. Reductions are the easy way to use algorithms. You just take your problem and reduce it to a problem that you already know how to solve. You take the input of some problem that you want to solve, and you convert it to an input to some other problem like single source shortest paths or something like that, that you already have an algorithm for solving.

So if you have an algorithm that solves problem B, you can convert that into a solution for B. And a reduction should also tell me, given a solution to be how to convert it back to a solution for A. And when I say solution here, I actually mean certificate from a second ago. So how, so reduction consists of these two pieces, how to convert an input at A to an input for B and given a solution to B, how to convert it to a solution to A. Let's look at some examples of reductions that you've already seen. You've seen a lot of them.

If I had, if I have unweighted shortest paths on the left, unweighted single source shortest paths, I can reduce that to weighted shortest paths. How? I set all the weights to one. So here, I'm given a graph, excuse me, without weights. And if I set all the weights to one, that turns it into an input for a weighted single source shortest path. So if you didn't know how to solve, solve it, then you can solve it by converting it.

And you've already written, say, a Deistra's algorithm. If you've already written that, you could apply it to solve unweighted single source shortest paths. Now we know a faster way to solve this, but it's only by a log factor faster. And here we're talking about polynomial versus exponential. So this is a valid reduction. It's not the most interesting one from an algorithmic standpoint, but it is an algorithm.

Another one we've seen is if you have integer weights on the left, you can convert that to unweighted on the right positive integer weights by subdividing each edge weight W into W edges of no weight. So maybe that's a little bit less efficient. It depends on what the sum of the weights are. Another version that we've seen is longest path in a graph. We can weighted path we can reduce to shortest paths in a graph weighted by negating all the weights. We did this in some of the dynamic programming things like longest paths on DAG.

We can convert that into a shortest path on a DAG just by negating all the weights. So these are examples of converting one problem to another. Usually you convert from, for algorithms, you convert from a problem you want to solve into a problem you already know how to solve, but it turns out the same tool reductions can be used to prove negative results too. And in this case, we're going to reduce from a problem that we that we think cannot be solved and reduce it to a problem that we're interested in solving. So let me write more precisely what this means. If you can find a reduction like this, it means that solving A is at least as easy as solving B because I could solve A in particular by converting it into B, solving B and then converting it back into a solution for A.

So in other words, if I can solve B, I can solve A, which I can phrase informally as A is at least as easy as B. And now using grammar, this is the same thing as saying B is at least as hard as A. And this is what I mean by at least as hard as so. So this is my definition of at least as hard. And in this notion of NP hardness. So what NP hardness means is that I'm at least as hard as all problems in NP.

So what this means is every problem in NP can be reduced to Tetris, which is kind of funny. But in particular, it means that if there's an algorithm for Tetris, there's an algorithm for all problems in NP. And so that's actually the contrapositive of the statement. So this is saying if there's a polynomial, if I take the contrapositive of this, this is saying if they're the polynomial time algorithm for Tetris, then P equals NP, there's a polynomial time algorithm for every problem in NP. And the way we prove that is by reductions, we can take an arbitrary problem in NP, and we reduce it to Tetris. Luckily, that's not as hard as it sounds because it's already been done once.

There's already a reduction from NP to from all problems in NP to singular problems out there, the NP complete problems. There is some first NP complete problem, which I guess is the Turing machine. It's basically simulating a lucky algorithm, so it's kind of not a very interesting problem. But from that problem, if you can reduce it to any other problem, you know that problem is NP hard as well. So what else do I want to say? So another example, this other bolded spot is called X complete completeness.

And this includes problems such as n by n chess. So we know that chess requires exponential time because in fact it's among the hardest problems in exponential time. But most common are that somehow because of the two player nature of the game, most common are NP complete problems. And we have a bunch of NP complete problems. I'll just briefly mention here. So we saw the subset sum problem, which we had a polynomial time algorithm for, sorry, a pseudo polynomial time algorithm for last class, in fact has no polynomial time algorithm, assuming P equals NP.

So pseudo poly is the best you can know for for subset sum. There's a related notion called weekly NP hardness, which I won't go into here. Three partition is when you can look up online. We saw some some reductions to other problems. So these are all NP complete longest common subsequence is another dynamic programming problem we saw with two sequences. I mentioned you can solve it for three or four or any constant number.

But if I gave you n sequences, each of length n, that problem is NP hard and NP complete. Longest simple path in a graph, we know how to solve longest path, you just solve shortest path and negate weights. But longest simple path where you don't repeat vertices, that's NP complete. Repeatedly, one of the most famous NP complete problems is is traveling salesman problem, finding the shortest path that visits all vertices in a given graph. So instead of just going from A to B, I want to I want to visit all the vertices in the graph. A lot of these problems I'm phrasing as optimization problems.

But when I say NP complete, I actually mean a decision version of the problem. For example, the decision question is, is is the shortest path that visits all vertices in a graph less than or equal to a given value x. If you can solve this, then by binary search, you can solve the the overall weight, right? Three coloring a graph is hard, even though two coloring a graph is polynomial, three coloring is NP complete, assigning three colors to the vertices so that no adjacent vertices have the same color. Finding the largest click in a graph, which which would be useful for analyzing social networks, whatever. And some more fun examples are our Minesweeper or Sudoku, basically any paper and pencil puzzle that you've ever played.

There's probably a paper out there proving that it's NP complete. And on the video game side, you've got like Super Mario Brothers is NP hard, like Zelda, I don't know all of their names, but Zelda is NP hard, Pokemon is probably NP hard. These these problems are actually all a little bit harder than NP in a different subject called PSPACE, which which I won't go into. But if you're interested in this stuff, do some Google searches for fun examples of NP hardness and other types of hardness proofs from a sort of algorithm perspective for for lots of games and puzzles you might might care about. It's it's super cool what you can read up online and find papers about. So anyway, I will see you next time.