You have started screen share. Okay lecture 10. You're going to have to forgive me. I have a little bit of a cold, but the show goes on. So we just started talking about graph theory, which is going to be sort of our focus. For the next couple of lectures, I thought we'd give it a little bit of review at the beginning of this lecture and then start in with some new ideas. Um, so our basic sort of definition of a graph is that we have some set of some set V, which is like the set of vertices. And then we have a set E, which is our set of edges. And it's a subset of V cross V, right? We talked about this. And this is, that's nothing more than just fancy notation for saying that an edge is a pair of vertices, like a from and a to vertex. Um, of course, there's many variations on this thing. You could have a directed versus an undirected graph. Um, so here we've got, uh, we've got directed, right? Meaning our edges are shown as arrows here. If they didn't have arrowheads, they'd be undirected. That's usually how we notate that. Um, we define something called a simple graph where you essentially have no repeated edges and then there are a couple of different notations that were kind of useful. Um, so in particular, let's, let's make our graph slightly more interesting. Um, we're going to add another edge going in the reverse direction. So maybe I have, um, I've given my vertices labels X, Y, Z and W. Then we talked about the neighbors of a given vertex, which are the vertices that you can reach by following edges in or out of your vertex. So in particular, the outgoing neighbors, which we sort of implicitly defined in our previous lecture, but didn't call it out. Um, we, we notate those with ADJ plus adjacent plus. So for example, ADJ W is a set of vertices Y and Z. Um, so to continue just our tiny amount of review, um, for the day, remember that a graph, there are, there are many ways to represent a graph. The sort of brain dead one, I guess, um, would be just like a big long list of edges. But of course for our algorithm, it's not a particularly efficient way to check things like does this edge exist in my graph. Um, so the basic representation that I think we're mostly working from in this course is to think of a graph like a set of vertices, each of which maps to another set of vertices. Um, so roughly every vertex maybe stores its, its outgoing set of edges. And so this is kind of nice because of course very quickly we can answer questions like is this edge inside of our graph or we can iterate over the neighbors of a vertex and so on, uh, which, which are kind of the typical things that we do a lot in graph algorithms. And then finally in, in our previous lecture, we started talking about paths. So a path is like a chain of vertices that can get me from one vertex to the other only following edges of my graph. Um, there's a term that I think I forgot to define last time because it didn't really matter a ton, which is, which is a simple path, which is just a path that doesn't have the same vertex more than, more than once. Um, and then of course there are many different questions you could ask about a graph that are basically different problems involving computing, uh, paths. So for instance, the shortest path between two vertices is sort of our, our, um, like very popular one in, in graph theory, or you could ask questions about reachability and so on. So there's our, our basic review from our previous lecture. There's one additional piece of terminology that I think I should clarify. Um, the more I was thinking about this. There's this interesting phrase, um, linear time, which we all know and love in, in computer science, right? Computer science theory. And this sort of implicit thing, especially in this course is that when we say linear time, we mean in the size of our input, right? And so if we have a linear time graph algorithm, well, how much space does it take to store a graph? Um, well, we need a list of, of vertices and a list of edges, if nothing else. And so a reasonable way to interpret this phrase linear time is that it's an algorithm that, that looks like, um, what, what we were showing on the screen, right? Um, so if you want to say, say linear in the sum of the number of vertices and edges, that's fine. Um, but if you see this phrase, that's, that's how you should interpret. Hopefully that's a fair, um, a fair way to put it. The, the times proportional to maybe the sum of the number of vertices and the number of, of edges, if that makes you uncomfortable, it, like it does for me, um, because one of these things on shown on screen here, right? One of these things can, they can scale on the other. Um, so we can always add more detail. That's what I'm saying. If it is fine to say it's linear in, in the sum of the number of vertices and edges. So hopefully that makes a little bit more sense. Um, okay. So last time we talked about an algorithm called, um, breadth first search BFS for, for those in the know, and breadth first search is an algorithm. And the reason we use the word breadth is because it's, it's kind of, remember, we talked about level sets last time because we talked about breadth first search in the context of computing shortest paths. And in particular, we have our, our source node here all the way on the left side. And then breadth first search constructed all the notes that were, um, distance one away, right? So that's our first level set. And then all that were distance two away, and then all that were distance three away and so on. So in particular, the level set, um, L three isn't visited until we're, excuse me, until we're completely done with the level set L two. Um, today we're going to find another algorithm, which is called depth first search, which doesn't do that, but rather starts with its first vertex and then just starts walking all the way out until it can't do that anymore. Um, and then it, and then it backfacts. That's one way we can think about it. And so in breadth first search, we're like drawing, um, concentric circles in, in depth first search, we're doing the opposite. We're like shooting outward, uh, until we've reached the outer boundary and then we're exploring the graph all the way. Um, okay. So the, these are sort of the two extremes in terms of, of graph search kind of techniques that are typically used under the basic building blocks of four algorithms and graph theory. Uh, so in order to motivate and think about depth first search, we're going to define a second problem, which is closely related to shortest path, but not exactly the same. And that is the reachability problem. So here I have the world's simplest directed graph. Um, the black things here are the edges and the circles are the nodes or the vertices. Um, and I've marked one special node in blue. That is our source node. And now the question I want to ask, what are all the other nodes in my graph that I can reach by following edges, directed edges, uh, starting with the source? Think about that. So obviously I can get to the node in the lower right. No problem. Right. And of course, once I get there, I can traverse an edge upward, um, to get to that second green vertex. Um, notice I was a little bit sneaky and I drew edges in this graph that might make you think uh, that the red node is reachable. The red node being the one in the upper left, I'm realizing now for colorblind people, this is not a great slide. Um, but of course, because all the edges from the red vertex on the left here point out, I can't actually reach it from the blue source node. So the reachability problem is just asking, which nodes can I reach from a given source? Pretty straightforward, I think. Um, of course, many ways to solve this, right? In fact, one way we could do it would be to use our previous lecture. We could compute the shortest path distance from the source to all other nodes and then, and then what would the length of the shortest path from the source to an unreachable node be if we're doing that, if we're doing it that way. It'll be infinity, right? So in addition to this, of course, a totally reasonable question, thinking back to our shortest path lecture, there, there are sort of two queries we might make, right? One is just what is the length of the shortest path? The other is like, um, what, what is the actual shortest path from the source to a given vertex? We can ask a very similar thing here, which is, okay, you, you tell me that the, the green guy is reachable, but how, um, give me, give me a path as evidence or, or certificate. Um, if you want to be fancy. So in order to do that, just like last time, remember, we define a particular data structure that was the shortest path tree. We can do something very similar. If we look at the next slide, this is like the extent of my power, powering skills here. Um, but if I, if I have a reachability problem, I can additionally store, I can decorate every node in my graph with one other piece of information, which is the previous node along some path from my source to that thing, right? And just like last time, if I want to get an actual path from, from the source to W, what could I do? I can start with W and then just keep following those parent relationships until I get back to the source. Then if I flipped the order of that list of, of vertices, I get a path from the source to the target that's valid, right? So this object, uh, is called a parent tree, just like we talked about in our last lecture. There's no reason why, why this thing should ever have a cycle in it, right? It's certainly a tree. So that's, that's our basic reachability problem. And in addition to that, we can compute this object P here shown, which is going to give me, um, sort of information about how any given node was, was reachable. There's a slight difference between the parent tree that I've defined here and the shortest path tree, which I'd find last time, which is I'm not going to require that the path I get when I backtrack along my tree P is the shortest path. It's just a path because for the reachability problem, I actually don't care, right? Um, like we, we can have a weird, um, crazy long path and it still tells me that that node is reachable, right? So that's our basic setup in our data structure. And now, um, now we can introduce a problem to solve reachability. Uh, again, we, we already have an algorithm for doing that, which is to compute shortest path and remember that our shortest path algorithm from previous lecture took linear time, uh, in, in the size of the input, it took V plus E time. And the question is, can we do a little better? And I have the answer obviously is, is yes, because I just asked, asked you that question and I'm giving you a problem. Um, and so on the next slide here is a technique for doing that, which unsurprisingly is a recursive algorithm. And this algorithm is called depth first search. Um, and, and here's the, the basic strategy. I'm going to choose the source node, label that node one here. I suppose I actually should have labeled it zero, um, zero index. I should probably fix that. Um, but in, in any event, source node labeled one here, I'm, uh, so I've marked my source node and now I'm going to look at every node, every edge coming out of that node and I'm going to visit it recursively. So that's sort of, um, that's our sort of for loop inside of this function visit or visit function here. Um, and then for each neighboring node, if I haven't visited it before, in other words, I currently haven't given it a parent. Um, that's our F statement here. Then I'm going to say, well, now they do have a parent and that parent is me and I'm going to recurse. Do you guys see what this is doing? It's, it's kind of crawling out. It's, it's crawling outward inside of our graph. So let's do the example, um, on the screen here. And, uh, I purposely designed this example to look a little bit different from our breath first search, at least if, if you choose to do the, the ordering that I did. So here's our graph. We have one, two, three, four, well, we have one, two, five, and then three, four, right? Um, and let's think about the traversal order that the depth first search is going to do, right? So, so we have our source marked with an arrow and now what does the source do? Let's think about our recursion tree. So we have the source all the way at the top when, when now we're talking about our recursion tree, we have our source all the way at the top and, and he's going to start calling the visit, um, function recursively. Um, the source has one outgoing neighbor here and it hasn't been visited yet. So of course the very first recursive call that I make is to that neighbor two. And now the neighbor two also recursive, recurses. And if we're in our tree, right, we had our source, we recursive to them to also record, re-curses. Um, our name, uh, two has two neighbors, three and five. So let's say we choose three first and now three recurses calls four. And then, and then at that point, our recursion tree is, is kind of done. So now it goes back out. And then finally two looks at his next neighbor, which is the five visits that recursively. So five kind of ends our tree, right? Notice that this is not following the level sets, right? The depth first search algorithm got all the way to the end of my tree in the recursive calls and then kind of backed its way out to the two before calling the five. Um, these are not the same technique. One goes all the way to the end and then kind of backtracks. And when I say backtrack, what I, what I mean is the recursion is kind of unraveling. Uh, whereas in breadth first search, I visit everything in one level set before I work my way out. Hopefully that distinction makes sense. Okay. So, so of course we need to prove, um, that this algorithm does something useful. So let's do that now. Um, so in particular, we need a correctness proof. So our claim is going to be that the depth first search algorithm visits all, uh, I guess, uh, reachable V and then it correctly sets the parent in the process. So in order to prove this, of course, as, as with almost everything in this course, we're going to use induction. And in particular, uh, what we're going to do is induction on the distance from the source. And we're going to say that for all vertices, uh, in distance K from the source, the statement is true. And then we are going to prove this inductively on K. So we want to induct on K, which is the distance from the source for text. So as with all of our other inductive proofs, we have to do our base case and then our inductive step. So in the base case, K equals zero. This was an easy base case, of course, right? Because what is the thing that is distance zero from the source? It's a source, right? Um, and if you remember our strategy from the top of the previous line, um, I guess I brought it over. Um, we explicitly set the correct parent for the source. And in some sense, visit it because the very first thing we do is call, um, visit a vest, right? Um, so there's, there's kind of nothing to say here, right? I mean, there's plenty to say if I had to write it out in one of your weekly tests. Um, but you're lazy instructor, AKA me. Um, I'm going to call this good virtual, virtual check mark. Okay. So, so now we have to do our inductive step. So what does that mean? We're going to assume that our statement is true for all nodes with a distance K. And then we're going to prove that the same thing is true for all nodes with a distance K plus one. All right. So let's do that. Let's consider a vertex V that's distance K plus one away. Uh, so in other words, the distance from the source to V is equal to K plus one. And what's our goal? Our goal is to show that the parent of V is set correctly. So now what can we do? Well, there's, there's this number, uh, our number is distance here. So in particular, the shortest path from S to V. Um, so, so remember our argument last time that essentially when we took, when we look at a shortest path and we kind of truncate it by one, um, it's, it's still the shortest path, right? Um, that probably doesn't matter so much here, but at least we know there's another vertex on the path, which is one distance from one less away. Um, so let's take you, which is also a vertex to be the previous node on the shortest path from S to V, right? And so in particular, we know that the distance from S to U is equal to K and conveniently, of course, by our inductive hypothesis here, we know that our property is, is true. Right. And so now our algorithm, what do we know? Well, because our property is true, the visit function at some point in its life is called on our vertex U. That's sort of what our induction assumes. So we have two cases, right? When we visit U, we know that when we call our visit function, we'll remember that kind of V by definition is in ADJ plus of U, right? Addition plus U. Um, so in particular, um, depth first search is going to consider V when it gets called. Okay. And now there's two cases, right? So either when this happens, P of V does not equal none. Right. Well, what does that mean? It means that we already kind of found a suitable parent for V and we're in good shape. Otherwise, P of V does equal none. Well, in this case, the very next line of code correctly sets the parent and, and we're all done, right? In our, in our function, in our visit U function, right? Um, so what did we just show? We showed that the depth first search algorithm can dig around in a graph and tell me all the things that are searchable or, or rather reachable from a given source, just basically by calling visit on that source and then expanding outward recursively. Okay. So I think this is certainly straightforward from, from an intuitive perspective. Um, so of course, what do we do in this class? We always follow the same kind of, uh, not boring, but we, we follow the same pattern here. The first thing we do, we define an algorithm. Second thing we do, make sure that it's the right algorithm and what is the last thing we need to do then. We analyze it, right? Um, in particular, we need to make sure that it finishes in, in a relatively. Okay. Time. Um, and indeed depth first search doesn't really take that long, uh, at all, which, which is a good thing. Um, so let's think about this a bit. So what's going to end up happening in depth first search? Um, we're going to visit every vertex at most once kind of by definition here. And in each case, we're going to just visit its neighboring edges. So can we ever traverse an edge more than one time? No, right? Because the visit function only ever gets called one time per vertex and our edges are direct, uh, directed, right? So, so kind of think about the from of every edge. The from vertex is only ever visited one time and hence every edge is only visited one time. So let me pose this question to you then. Does DFS work for an undirected graph? Think about that for a moment. Absolutely. Right. So there's, there's sort of different ways to think about it. Um, one is to think of an undirected graph, like a directed graph with, with, um, or here we go to edges, um, pointed either way, which is, I think in this class, how we actually kind of notated it in the previous lecture. Um, now does DFS ever visit a vertex that is not reachable from the source? Well, uh, the answer is no, because all I ever do is recursively call on, on my neighbors. And so kind of by definition, if I'm not reachable, DFS, uh, will never, will never see it, right? It'll never see me. So, um, if I think about my runtime carefully, it's not quite the same as breadth-first search as shown in, in the slide here. Remember that breadth-first search took V plus E time in, in depth-first search. It just takes order E time because I'm expanding outward from the source vertex, hitting every edge adjacent to every vertex that I've seen so far. But I never reach a vertex, uh, that isn't reachable, right? And so because this only ever touches every edge one time, we're in good shape. Uh, the one thing to notice is that these algorithms for, are, are for slightly different tasks in some sense. The way that we wrote down breadth-first search last time conveniently, it gives us the shortest path. Um, there are breadth-first search algorithms that, that don't. Um, I think in this class, we kind of think of breadth-first search. Um, we, we motivate it in terms of the shortest path problem, but it's just kind of a strategy of working outwards from a vertex. Whereas the way we've written down, um, depth-first search, there's no reason why the path, um, that we get shouldn't be the shortest, right? So, so to think of a really extreme example, let's say I have a psychograph, um, so I have a big loop like this. Let's say I do depth-first search starting from the boxed vertex here. I just put a box here on one of the vertices. Um, well, what would happen? Um, well, um, that guy would call its neighbor recursively, who then calls its neighbor recursively, who then calls his neighbor recursively and so on. So of course, when I do depth-first search, when I get to my last vertex there, there's a chain of one, two, uh, one, two, three, four vertices behind it. Um, is that the shortest path from our source to the target? Well, clearly not, right? Because I could have just traversed the edge that I've shown them with an arrow, that, that kind of backwards edge. Um, I just, I just chose not to, right? So that's the depth-first search algorithm. It's just essentially a recursive strategy where I traverse to all my neighbors and each of my neighbors traverses to their neighbors and so on. So why might we want to use this algorithm? Well, we've already solved the reachability problem. So let's solve a few more things using the same basic strategy here. Um, so there's some notions that we've sort of actually in, in some sense, we already used in, in lecture here, but we might as well, uh, call them out for what they are, which is the idea of connectivity. So a graph is connected if there's a path getting from every vertex to every other vertex, right? Now connectivity in a directed graph is kind of a weird object. Like for instance, think of a directed graph with just two edges. And one edge goes from you to V. Um, then I can get from V to you, but not vice versa. This is kind of a weird, a weird notion. Um, so here we'll mostly worry about connectivity only for undirected graphs because they're, um, the, the vertices just basically come in like big connected clumps, uh, or, or the more technical term for a big connected clump is, is a connected component, right? Um, so let's see, let's see an example. Um, let's say I have a graph that has an edge and, um, and then a triangle. So this is one graph. Let's see. So you see that? So, so there's a collection of vertices and then there's a collection of edges. Um, but it has two connected components, the guy on the right and the guy on the left, meaning that each vertex on the right is reachable from every other vertex on the right. Each vertex on the left is reachable from every other vertex on the left, but there's no edge that goes from the triangle to the line segment, right? And so in the connected components problem, we're given a graph like this one. And the problem you're trying to solve is just to enumerate all these clumps of vertices that are reachable from one, um, from, from one another in an undirected graph and conveniently we can use the depth first search to solve this problem pretty easily, right? Um, so how could we do that? Well, in some sense, how can we find one connected component? Um, let's, let's say I just choose a vertex in my graph. Well, what do I know about everything in its connected component? Well, it's, it's reachable from that vertex, right? Remember, we just solved the reachability problem, which says if I have a vertex, I can now tell you all the other vertices that are reachable from that guy. So I could call DFS on, um, well, well, any vertex of the cycle here. Call, call the reachability thing. And I know that for every vertex, there's one of two things. Either the vertex had the parent in that object P or it's the source. So I can very easily find the connected component corresponding to that vertex. Hopefully that makes sense. Um, ha, have I found all the connected components? No, I found one. I found the one corresponding to the arbitrary vertex that I just chose. So how could I fix this? Well, super simple. I could put a for loop on the outside, which just loops over all the vertices, maybe, and if that vertex is not part of a connected component yet, then I need to make a new one. So then I call DFS on that vertex. I collect all the vertices that I got and I iterate. Um, so this is the algorithm in this class that we are going to call full DFS. Um, by the way, you could, you could do the same thing with full breadth first search. That's perfectly fine. Just kind of by, by analogy here. Um, right. So, so what is full DFS? Well, I'm, I'm going to iterate over all my vertices. I have a for loop, right? And if V is unvisited, then I'm going to do DFS starting at V. Um, I guess we use visit to refer to this in the previous slide. Um, and, and that's going to kind of flood fill that whole connected component. And then I can collect that connected component and, and continue. We have to be a little careful because of course we don't want like something to be visited, something visited, um, to somehow take a bunch of time and make my algorithm slower than it needs to be. Um, but of course we have a set data structure that we know can do that in order one time, at least in, in expectation. Um, okay. So this is the full DFS algorithm. It's really simple. I call DFS on, on every vertex and it's full because I looped over all the vertices. Right. So if we think about it, how much time does this algorithm take then? It's a little bit sneaky because somehow I have a full, I have a for loop over all the vertices, then I could imagine a universe where I get like, um, vertices times some other number because there's a for loop and then there's, there's something inside of it. Um, I think that's how we're used to thinking about runtime of for loops. But in this case, that doesn't actually happen because there's never a case where an edge gets traversed more than one time. Um, because if I'm a, if I'm in one connected component, then by definition, I can't be in another connected component. Right. And so what happens in some sense is this innocent looking call to, to DFS, it has a side effect, which is that I marked all the vertices in that connected component as like, don't, don't touch me again. Right. And so I implicitly, I kind of removed edges in this process. So if you think through it carefully, the runtime of this full DFS algorithm is, um, V plus E time, because every edge is touched no more than one time, um, kind of amortized all over all the different calls to, to DFS here. And there's this for loop over vertices. So, so clearly an order V that you, that you need here. Um, okay. Does that argument make sense? So again, we, we call that linear in the size of the input. I'm going to say that a lot of times to get that right in my own head as well. Um, to, to be able to teach that better to you guys. Um, so this is the, this is the basic problem. This comes up all the way or all the time, by the way, like it seems, um, so it just seems like a weird algorithm. Um, like somehow why would you want an algorithm that finds connected components? Like, like why, why would you even have a graph that's disconnected or something? Maybe it feels weird to think about that, but of course it can happen a lot. Right. So for instance, maybe you, maybe you work out a social media company and people have friends, but let's say like, let's say like my husband and I are friends. Um, but we're not friends with anyone else. There's like, we have like blood out kind of thing. Um, then it might not be so easy to find in the graph because of course we're just two among a sea of people on social media. Um, which, which all have different interconnections that are just numerator based on the list of edges, right? And so even though like pictorially it's kind of hard to draw a, a connecting component algorithm in a way that doesn't make it sound like a kind of useless technique from the start, because it's very clear there are two connected components there. Um, of course we still have to be able to write code to solve this sort of thing. So we have one additional piece of depth for search interclass today, which is sort of on the opposite end of the spectrum. Um, so we just talked about graphs that are undirected and we're thinking about cycles now on the opposite end, we might think of the dag, right? So a dag has a directed acyclic graph. Can you think of a special case of a dag? Oh, I guess I should define it first. Sorry. Um, and then we'll come back to that question. Uh, so, so a gag is a graph that has directed edges now and doesn't have any cycles in it. So actually the graph I gave you at the beginning of the lecture, I think secretly was an example of one of these. Um, I'll bring it back here. Um, so let's say that I have directed edges. I have an edge, um, up and an edge to the right. And similarly an edge down and an edge to the right. Um, the graph looks like a cycle, but it's not, uh, because the only direction I can move is from the left hand side to the right hand side. Right. Um, I guess in the way that I, uh, oriented it here, it's kind of like a diagonal here from the bottom corner to the top. We're, um, anyway, the graph looks like a cycle, but it, but it's not. Um, so this is a directed graph and it doesn't contain any cycles, meaning there's, there's no path that it can take from a vertex that gets back to itself along the directed edges. Um, and dag show up all the time. Um, so now I have to find what a dag is. Can you think of an example that we've already seen in 381 in this class? A treat. Maybe you were thinking something else, right? But, but we've talked about, um, a treat. At least if we orient all the edges kind of pointing downward in that tree, right? Otherwise it gets kind of debatable about whether it's a dag or not. Um, if there's no direction to, to the edges, then, then somehow the definition just doesn't apply. Um, okay. So in processing directed acyclic graphs, there's a really useful thing that you can do that's going to show up in this class quite a bit, which is to compute a topological order on the graph. So topological ordering, we think of F as a function that assigns maybe every node and index in an array. Uh, I guess I shouldn't use the word right here, but, but just like an index and ordering. So, um, like we have our first vertex, we have our second vertex and so on. The topological, then the topological order is one that has the property shown here on the slide, which is that if I have a directed edge from U to V, then F of U is less than F of V. So in other words, if I look at the ordering that I get on my topological order, uh, you has to appear before V, right? So let's look at our example again here. Um, let's give our nodes names. We've got A, B, C and D. Well, what clearly has to be the first note of my topological order, I already showed it, but, um, A, right? It goes all the way to the left hand side. Um, well, after that, it's a bit of a toss up, right? What do we know? We know that B and C have to appear before D. So, uh, maybe it'll just be annoying on our, on our topo order here. Um, I'm going to, I'm going to go A, um, C, B and then D. So it's a topological order. Uh, notice that things that are on the upper left in my graph, um, are before the things on the right and note that the word before here means that there's an edge that points from one to the other. Okay. Um, by the way, are, are topological orderings unique? No, right? They're not. So if we look at our graph example here, A, B, C, D is also a topological order. And that means when we design an algorithm for finding topological order, there's some design decisions that we can make. And we just have to find one among many. Um, but in any event, we're going to define a slightly, um, different notation of order. And then we're going to show that they're closely linked to each other. Uh, and that is the, the finishing order. So in the finishing order, we're going to call full DFS on our graph. Remember that means we iterate over all of our nodes. And if we haven't seen that node yet, we call DFS on it. And now we're going to make an order in which as soon as the call to a node in that visit function is complete, meaning I've already iterated over all my neighbors. Then I add my note to that ordering. Does that make sense? It's a little bit backwards from what we're used to thinking about. Uh, so, so it's the order in which full DFS finishes visiting each vertex. And now here's the claim. Um, it's, it's that if we have a reverse finishing order, meaning that we, we take the finishing order and then we flip it backward, that's exactly going to give us a topological ordering of the vertices in our graph. Um, so let's look at that on the. Oh, well, I already put it up on the, on the slide here. Uh, our claim, if I have a graph G, that's a DAG, then the reverse finishing order is a topological order. Uh, by the way, we're not going to prove the converse that if I have a topological order that somehow that thing is the reverse of DFS, uh, at least the way that maybe I coded it. Um, but there's a slightly different statement, which is, does there exist a DFS that has that ordering? Right. That's one that we'll worry about another time. Um, okay. So we're going to prove this thing. What are we going to do? Um, well, what, uh, we, we need to check is the topological order. Um, if I, if I look at any edge of my graph, um, it obeys the relationship that I have on the screen here. So in particular, we're going to take UV inside of my set of edges. And then what I need is that you is ordered before V using the reverse of the finishing order that we've defined. Okay. So let's think back to, um, to our call to the DFS algorithm, um, where we call our visit function. So we have two cases. Either you is visited before V or it isn't right. So let's do those two cases. So case number one, you is visited before V, right? So what does this mean? Well, remember that there's an edge like pictorially what's going on. I've tried to kind of help us out over here. Um, so, so there's all kinds of graph stuff going on. And, and then we have you and we know that there's a directed edge from you to V. That's our super simplified picture here, right? We're, that we're looking at. And maybe there's other stuff going on outside of this. Now, just by the way that we've defined our visit function, what do we know? We, we know that when we call visit on you, well, V is one of its outgoing neighbors. So in particular, a visit on you is going to call visit V. And, and we know that because you is visited before V. So currently V's parent is none when I get to you. Um, now here's our reverse ordering. We're going to have to keep it in our head because now we'll visit a visit of you calls visit of V. So notice the visit of V has to complete before visit of you, right? So in reverse finishing order here, what does that mean? Um, if, if this completes before the, the other guy, then they get flipped backwards on our list, which is exactly what I want because there's an edge from you to V. Okay. So case one done. Now we have case two, which is that, which is that V is visited before you. So now I'm going to make one additional observation. So in our second picture here on the slide, I have a source for texts. His name is S. Um, now there's a bunch of edges and, and whatever there's a long path. And now eventually what happens? Oh, I got kind of cut off a little bit. Um, eventually, uh, what happens? Well, I have a node V and somewhere out there in the universe is another node you. And I know that by assumption, I know that there's an edge from you to V. So that's our picture so far. Um, so we know that our graph is a cyclic kind of by definition. That's our assumption. So can we reach you from V? In other words, does there exist a path from V to you? Um, no, right? Because our, our graph is a cyclic and we just drew a cycle there. I try to kind of notate that with, with a big X through that frowning face. Can't do it. It kind of got cut off in the slide. But, um, so by this picture, I suppose, we know that you cannot be reached from V. Um, so, so the visit to V is going to complete and never see you because remember the visit to V only ever calls things that are, that are kind of descendants of V. So in other words, visit of V completes without seeing you. Um, well, that's exactly the same thing that we showed in our first case, right? So by the same reasoning, what does that mean in our reverse finishing order? The ordering from you to V is preserved. So that sort of completes our proof here that reverse finishing order gives me a topological order, which is kind of nice. And so, so this is a nice convenient way of taking all the nodes in a directed acyclic graph and ordering them in a way that represents the topology or, or the connectivity of that graph. So we're going to conclude with one final problem and that is cycle detection. Um, the problem that we're looking for now is that we're given a directed graph, but now we don't know if it's a DAG or not. Um, and so the question that we're going to ask is, does there exist a cycle in our directed acyclic graph? So we're just given our graph. We want to know, can we do this? Um, let's think through the logic of that a bit. What do we know? We know that if our graph were a DAG, then I could call the FS, get the ordering out, um, and then I guess flip it's ordering backwards. So I could compute the reverse finishing order and it would give me a topological order of my graph. So if I were a DAG, I would get a topological order when I call DFS, right? So, so let's say that I ran DFS, I got whatever ordering I got. And now I found an edge that points in the wrong direction. I can just double check my list of edges and I find one that does not respect the relationship we saw on the previous slide of F of u is less than F of v for all u v in E. Um, can my graph be a DAG? No, right? Because if my graph were a DAG, the algorithm would work. I just proved that to you, right? So if my graph were a DAG, then I could do reverse finishing order. Um, and what I would get back is a topological order. So if I found a certificate that my order wasn't topological, something went wrong. And the only thing that could have gone wrong is my graph not being a DAG. In fact, sort of an exercise left to the reader or your, just your section is that, um, this is an if, if and only if, meaning that the only time that you even have a topological ordering in your graph is if your graph is a DAG. Um, this is a really easy fact to, to sanity check. This, this isn't like a particularly challenging problem. It's, this is just a sick, like chicken and egg situation here. If anyway, picture, um, triangle vertices, ABC, ABC, ABC, how do you topologically sort those? How do you know which comes before the other? If, if you're stuck in a cycle. Um, okay. So think that through. It's a really good exercise to make sure that you understand the definitions, which is to say that if you have a topological sort of what I just say, if you have a topological order, uh, then, then your graph is, is a DAG. Um, if you don't have a topological order, your graph isn't a DAG. So in other words, I secretly gave you an algorithm for checking if a graph is a DAG at all. Um, what could I do? I could compute the reverse finishing order check if it obeys our rules for average. And if it does, we're in good shape. My graph is a DAG. Uh, and if it doesn't, something went wrong. And the only thing that could have gone wrong is not being a DAG. So in other words, we just, we just solved, um, we just solved the cycle detection problem here, which is to say that, well, if I have a cycle and if and only if I am not a DAG, which I can check using this technique, of course, the word detection here probably means that I actually want to find that cycle. And I haven't told you how to do that yet. Um, all we know how to do so far, uh, is, is to, is say, like somewhere in this graph, there's a cycle and that's not so good. So, so can we do one additional piece of information to sort of complete our story here, which is to modify our algorithm ever so slightly to not only say thumbs up, thumbs down, um, is a cycle in this graph or not, but it's to actually return the vertices as a cycle. Um, and here is the property that we're going to do that, which is, um, that if G contains a cycle, right, then full DFS will traverse an edge from a vertex V to some ancestor of V. Uh, I guess we haven't carefully defined the term ancestor here. Essentially, if you think of, uh, sort of running the DFS algorithm, then an ancestor is like something that appears in the recursive call tree before I got to be, um, okay. So how can we prove that? Well, let's take a cycle. We'll give it a name in particular. Let's say we have a cycle from, from V naught, um, V one to V K, and then it's a cycle. So it goes back to V naught, right? Um, and I can order this cycle anyway I want. Notice that if I, that if I permute the vertices in this list in a cyclical way, meaning that I take the last few of them, stick them at the beginning of the list, it's still a cycle. That's the nice thing about cycles. Um, so in particular, without loss of generality, we're going to assume that V naught is the first vertex visited by DFS. And what does that mean? That means that when I do my DFS algorithm, making all these recursive calls, the very first vertex to be touched by this technique is V naught. Uh, well, now what's going to end up happening. Well, think about the recursive call tree starting at V naught. By the time that completes, anything that's reachable from V naught is also going to be complete. Do you see that? Um, so for instance, V naught somewhere in its call tree might call V two and notice that V two was not already visited. So in fact it will for, for V one, I got to call V two and so on. And in particular, we're going to get all the way to vertex K, right? So in other words, we're going to visit a vertex V K and notice what's going to happen. So remember our algorithm. In fact, we should probably just put it up on the screen here. Um, well, V K is now going to iterate over every one of its neighbors of V K. And in particular, it's going to see vertex V naught, right? So we're going to see the edge from V K to V naught, which is an edge kind of by definition because we took this to be a cycle here. Um, but notice that's exactly the thing that we set out to prove, namely that full DFS traverses an edge from a vertex to one of its ancestors. Here, a vertex K, um, the ancestor V naught. Um, why do we know that it's an ancestor? Well, because V naught was, was called in our tree before any of these other guys, right? So we wanted an algorithm that not only did cycle detection, but also actually gave me the cycle. Um, what could we do? Well, it's essentially just a small modification of what we already have. If I want to compute topological order, I can just do DFS and that'll tell me yeah, your name, does there exist a cycle? If I want to actually find that cycle, all I have to do is check that topological order property at the same time that it traversed the graph during DFS. And then the, and the second that I find an edge that loops back, I'm done, right? And so that's our basic algorithm here. And, and this is a technique for actually just finding the cycle in a graph using the DFS algorithm. You have stopped the screen share.