Okay, welcome. Okay, in this lecture we've covered mostly all of the testable material that would be on a midterm exam. Today what I'm going to talk about is putting into context all the material that we've learned over the course thus far at a high level and talk about where we can go from here in terms of the latter half of the course and other theory courses and other classes in the department that would be related to this material. Okay, so we started out the term in lecture one and we had four main goals that we had for our course, really three main goals. Do you remember what they were? Obviously they're shown here, but hopefully you remember what they were.

The first one was to solve hard computational problems to be able to solve problems. So this is kind of like the let's make an algorithm part of the course. So we've got one solve hard computational problems. I guess hard here shown in quotes because we saw in the last lecture that what does hard mean in a technical sense, right? Hard could mean that there's no efficient algorithm that we know how to solve a problem on that's kind of getting a little bit ahead of ourselves, but computational problems with algorithms is really the key part about this goal. You're trying to convince a computer that you solved a problem on a finite set of inputs.

But really what this class is about is two other things, which, which is more about communication to people rather than computers, your algorithm might be correct or efficient, but you need to be able to communicate that to humans. And that's what the two other goals are. So second one is argue correctness. Basically, the thing that I'm doing to my inputs is always going to lead me to a correct output. No matter what input I give it, any, any valid input, there could be an infinite space of possible inputs. And in this class, that's the case, because we want our input size to grow arbitrarily large, we need to be able to argue correctness that it's going to return me the correct thing no matter what my inputs are.

And the third one is efficiency, argue that it's good. This is efficiency. What does what does good mean here? Well, that was hard to know at the beginning of our class. And so we set up this model of computation, a framework through which we could determine how good or bad our algorithms were by saying, by defining a model of computation, saying what things we can do in constant time, and then just building off of that. So this is basically our model plus some asymptotics or something like that, right?

This is about scalability, a model of computation tells us how much time we can spend, but it's compared to our input size. This is always about how does our algorithm perform relative to the rate that our problem size grows. And so that's really what we mean by by good. And in this class, we don't tend to talk about constant problem size, it's about how algorithms can scale as you have arbitrarily large inputs. That's why we need recursion and induction to be able to approve things about our algorithms, because they're for arbitrary n. And that's why we need this relative to input size, the growth factor of our algorithms performance relative to the input.

Okay, and then the last thing is, to me, one of the most important things is communication of these ideas to people. So communication is key here. If you can always write good code, that's always right, good for you, I can't do that all the time. But that might mean that you can be very a competent, independent computer programmer, but you're going to be limited in what you can do if you can only rely on yourself. A lot about computer science is working with others to solve computational problems. And when you're working with others to solve computational problems, you need to be able to communicate with them.

And you need to be able to communicate them both what it is you're doing and why you're doing it. That that you that what you're doing is the correct thing, and that it's efficient. And so that's a big part about this courses. And at the end of the day on your exam, if you write down, you know, a Python script for a correct algorithm, I don't know if we're going to do coding yet. But if you write down a Python script for a correct algorithm, but I don't know what it's doing, but it's correct, that that wouldn't get full points, because you're not satisfying the conditions of this class, it's really about communication here, communicating our results, discussing them, explaining them, proving them, things like that. And so just to review, since we've not discussed how the most recent lecture fits into some of our problem sets or possible problem sets and exercises that we could see, we'll argue that the ways that we're solving our problems are good.

What we proved in last lecture was that most of our problems can't be solved good, right, they can't be solved in polynomial time with respect to the size of your input. However, most of the problems that we think about in a sense, I can prove to you that it's a yes solution. I can show you a simple path that in this graph, that has a certain length, or I can show you a subset that sums to a certain value in a particular problem. I can give you a certificate that I can prove to you in a reasonable amount of time that, yes, I can prove to you that this thing is correct, this answer is correct. And that's what we talked about last lecture. So not always good algorithms to solve problems, right, but many problems we think about can be either checked in polynomial time, this is the concept of having a certificate that I could give you of polynomial size that could be checked in polynomial time in a sense.

That's a way, right, we can check in polynomial time, this leads to our class of decision problems and P, or it can be solved by brute force and exponential time. Most of the things that we've talked about in this class fall into one of these two categories, we can just brute force over the combinatorial space of possible outputs, and check to see if they're correct. Or I can give you a certificate basically saying, look, I can solve actually anything that's that's of this form can be checked in this form, because there's only a polynomial number of things to check or sorry, sorry, an exponential possible number of certificates of polynomial length to check. But basically, this is saying that the problems that we think of mostly fall into these two categories. And so there are usually our algorithms to solve the problems that we care about, even if, you know, most random problems in terms of bit strings that we gave an analysis in last lecture actually prove that most random problems are not solvable. In a sense, the problems we think about are not random, they kind of have this structure that they can be checked pretty easily.

Okay, so that's what that's what I mean when when we're talking about complexity. For the purposes of the exam, most of what's covered in terms of material on the exam will be testing the that that would be testing the lecture 19 material will be in terms of definitions. Do you understand what the decision problem class NP is X is, do you know how these relate to each other X is definitely, definitely a, a superset of NP here, NP nestles inside of X, they could be equal, probably not. Those are the type of things that that you would just want to make sure that you have an understanding of. Knowing a directionality of a reduction, if you have problem a and a problem B, and I know that a is difficulty by some measure, I'm sorry, difficult by some measure, I already happened to know that it's very hard like NP hard or something like that. If B is a problem that I'm interested in knowing the complexity about, and I can prove that I can solve it if I had a black box to solve B, any any black box to solve B, and I could make this reduction of polynomial time.

And if a is hard, then I better not be able to solve B in polynomial time, because then I would be able to solve a in polynomial time. So that's basically the type of argument usually in a in a true false question that could be on on a midterm exam for you to kind of understand the basic high level definitions involved in what lecture 19 is about. Hardness, the very most difficult problems of these classes and completeness, sorry, hard, anything harder than things in these classes. Whereas completeness is the ones that are in the set, but at least as hard as anything in those classes. So so that's just going to give you a brief overview of material that hasn't been tested, but but could be. So when when we don't have a good algorithm, we can actually prove that it probably doesn't have a good algorithm.

And that's a problem you'll be able to solve in future classes if you continue along this track. Okay, so what's the actual content then that we talked about? Okay, this is a very high level overview of why we're taking this class, why you're taking this class. But what is the content we actually covered? I like to break it up into kind of three units, I guess, in a sense, two sub units. The earlier material was about showing you some nice black boxes.

Basically, if I'm going to have inputs of non constant size, it's going to be useful for me to find things among those elements. So that's really what the first part is all about data structures and and finding things and non constant sized databases. And when we're storing these things, we want to support maybe two different types of queries. One was, sorry, yeah, so I want to be able to support queries and maintain an extrinsic order on those things. I might want a sequence. This is a sequence extrinsic order.

Or I want to be able to look up is this thing in my set by a key that we identify with with a unique key. So this is some intrinsic queries, an often order, right? A hash table doesn't maintain any order on on my keys, but it does support intrinsic queries. Is this thing in my set or not? But but I did show you other data set structures that do support an intrinsic order that allows me to see what the next larger and the previous the next larger and the next smaller item in my set is. So here is a oh, I'm so sorry, it's looks kind of blurry on my screen.

Hopefully it's not too blurry on your screen. I'm not going to go into how to use these things or how to choose from among here. But basically, the idea here is if we had a sequence, most of the time when you're programming, being able to push and pop at the end of the list is pretty good, which is why Python, the most fundamental data structure that you have is a list because it's a super useful thing. I just want to store a bunch of things, have random access to the say 10th element to my thing, but I'm not necessarily having to dynamically update the order of these things dynamically. I don't necessarily have to insert something in the middle of the list. But most of the time, what I can do is put out the end of the list, maybe swap it down into place if I need to.

So that's why a list is super useful. A sequence ABL tree useful, but not as ubiquitous as a linked list. I mean, as a dynamic array, sorry, I said linked list, I meant Python list, which is a dynamic array. So the dynamic array tended to be in coding practice, your most common sequence data structure here, though we can get pretty good for this insert in the middle operation with the sequence ABL. Okay, then on the data structure side, I categorize these things into a couple different categories here in terms of the operations we can support. Okay, there are intrinsic operations, finding things, inserting, deleting things.

I think of the first three as being dictionary operations. I want to just look up whether something's here. Whereas the last two are order preserving operations, where it matters what the order of the things are stored in. And so as you can see from the asymptotic complexity of the various operations here, the hash table is actually a super good fit. If you want the, maybe you just want to support dictionary operations, but in the cases where you need to maintain order dynamically, a set ABL is the way to go. But if you don't need a dynamic, but you still need those order operations, a sorted array is just good enough if you don't need to change where they are.

So that's a quick overview of like a unit one type data structures material. But then we use most of these data structures to get fasting sorter algorithms in different contexts. Basically, everything that's that everything on this list involved making a data structure and exploiting that data structure to get a better runtime. It's all except for, merge sort really. The first two were presented in terms of a priority queue. Whether we used a sorted array or an array, I represented at the end of lecture eight to get n squared running time.

We generalized that down to n log n by using a heap, that was a nice optimization. But we also got interesting data structures using, I mean, interesting sorting algorithms using an ABL tree because of the power of maintaining a dynamic order over time. But then exploiting a direct access array to be able to sort linear time for small bounded, bounded in terms of the input polynomial, polynomially bounded in terms of the input ranges of numbers. So we let we leverage that direct access array to get counting sort. And then we kind of amplified that effect by sorting on a bunch of digits multiple times to get basically polynomial blow up in terms of the numbers that we can sort in linear time. So that's an overview of the content of unit one, right?

In unit two, we're kind of like, okay, how now, now you know how to find these things within a set of just a flat list of things, you can put it in a data structure. But in a sense, a graph is a special kind of data structure that relates the different things in your input. So you've got a bunch of vertices, then there's, there's a relation now between those vertices and that are your edges. And this is a super useful framework in talking about discrete systems, because you can think of a vertex as a state of your system, and then connect these transitions as a graph. That's the reason why I mean, I mean, graphs are awesome, but they're awesome, because they can be used to model so many different things within our world. It's not just about road networks, it can be about playing your favorite turn based game like, like tilt.

Okay, so we talked about a lot of different types of problems that you could solve various algorithms with a focus on a bunch of different ways of solving single source shortest paths. And again, just like the sorting algorithms, and just like the data structures, I presented multiple of them, because we had this trade off of generality of the graph that they applied to contrasted with the running time. So I guess in particular, the top line here, right, is most restrictive, we don't have any cycles in our graph, there, that's a very special type of graph. And we're able to get linear time. There we go, what the heck. And we're able to get linear time.

But even if we do have cycles in our graph, we can do, we can do better. If we had a bound on the weights in our thing, whether they be there, there's an easy conversion to a linear time algorithm via an unweighted process, or whether these things are non negative, so there can't be any negative weight cycles, and we don't have to deal with that. Okay, so that's kind of unit two ish, and then unit three material was kind of applying this graph material to a recursive framework. And what is our recursive framework? Well, hopefully, you know it by now. We've got dynamic programming, and the framework is our sort bot, right?

You can actually think of this material as really an application of the graph material. So what are we doing in in sort bot, we're defining a set of problems. These are the set of vertices in the graph. What is the relationship doing it's saying, what are the relation between the sub problems essentially defining the edges of a graph. And then this topological order in the base cases, all these things are just saying, what is the problem that I want to solve on this graph? And how do I compute that for things that don't have any outgoing edges?

I'll bring back our overview here. So unit two is graphs. So graphs was basically a relationship on these non constant things. So this, this was kind of like useful black boxes that you can just bundle up, stick in some inputs, stick out some outputs, and you're golden, whereas unit three was very different. The material in unit three is very different. Dynamic programming, while it was in some sense related to this graph material, I'm constructing a graph, I have to construct that graph.

There's a creative process in trying to construct that graph. If I, you know, I don't give you a set of vertices, usually what I give you are, it's a sequence or something like that. And if you have to construct vertices, sub problems that will be able to, to be related in a recursive way, you, you can solve the sub problem. Dynamic programming is a, is a very much more difficult thing than these other subjects, I think, because there's a lot more creativity in it. In the same way that just applying, reducing to the graph algorithms we have is, is fairly easy, but actually doing some graph transformations to change the shape of the graph so that you can apply these algorithms, that's a harder thing to do. The difficulty with these two sets of materials is very similar, figuring out what the graph should be, figuring out what the sub problems should be and how they relate is really the entire part, the entire difficulty with solving problems recursively.

And I've only given you a taste of solving problems recursively in future classes. And in the second half of this class, you'll see design and analysis of algorithms. It's, it's quite a bit more difficult because I've mostly left it to you to use the things that I've given you, gave you to make your, your own algorithms based on this very nice cookbook like framework that you can plug in a recursive algorithm to. Now actually that cookbook is super nice for any way of looking at a problem recursively, but while in dynamic programming, the inductive hypothesis of combining your sub problems is almost trivial in other types of recursive algorithms, that's not necessarily the case, especially when instead of looking at all possible choices, for example, in a greedy algorithm where you're just looking at one of the choices, the locally best thing and recursing forward, you're not doing all the work, you're not locally brute forcing, you're locally picking an optimal thing locally and then helping that will lead you to a good thing. That's a much harder algorithmic paradigm to operate under. And so that's more like the material that we'll be talking about in the second half of this class.

So, so very quick overview of the first half of the content of this class. And, and I really like the structure of how this class is laid out, because it gives you a fundamental idea of the things people use to store information on a computer and a sense of how you solve problems computationally and how to argue that they're correct and efficient. That's that's really what this problem this this course is about. The second half of this course is a natural follow on to the things that we did in the first half, giving you the algorithm is not so difficult to state what is happening in the algorithm, but arguing that the thing is correct and arguing that the efficient that it's efficient, excuse me, that's that's where the computation complexity comes into the last half of the class. The analysis part would be quite more complicated. We'll solve a problem called Union Find and give a much we talked a little bit about amortization, we'll go into a much better, a much more formal way of proving things run in amortized time.

So this is basically amortization via what we'll call a potential analysis. It's basically making that notion that we talked about when we were talking about dynamic arrays of we're not doing this expensive thing too often. Basically, what we do is keep track of the cost of all sequence of operations and prove that the average cost is small. That's kind of what this potential analysis is doing. It's a little bit more formal process for for making the argument a little more formal. Right.

Okay, so so then on the graph side, this is kind of an extension of unit one type material. This is what is this Union Find data structure. It's basically it's a set type thing where I can make a set of just a single element. I can take two sets, merge them together, make them their union, and then given an object, I say which which set am I part of, essentially by electing a leader with an asset and saying return me a pointer to that one. And so this can be useful in dynamic in dynamically maintaining say the connected components in a dynamically changing graph, supporting the query of am I in the same component as this other guy that could be a very useful thing to know about a graph as it's changing. So that's an application of this problem and they get near constant performance for a lot of these queries.

It's not quite, but it's pretty close. On the graph side, we'll solve a number of very useful problems on graphs, minimum spanning tree. So I'm trying to find a tree connecting all the vertices and a connected component of my graph and I'm trying to find in a in a weighted graph, I'm trying to find the spanning tree that has the minimum total weight. So that's a problem, a fundamental problem in weighted graph algorithms. We'll solve this via a greedy algorithm and network flow and I and I guess cuts. So this is what is this this is I'm given a weighted graph basically each of the weights corresponds to a capacity I could push water through along this edge.

And and I may be given a source vertex and a sink vertex and I want to say, you know, I want to shove water through the source vertex along the edge, the edges with their various capacities. And I'll get some amount of water on the other end in the source. So the question is what's the most amount of water that I can push through this? Well, I could build a pipe network with the different things and just do this experimentally. I just stick a bunch of maybe I'm a mechanical engineer. So that maybe makes sense to me.

But you want to you want to be able to just look at the numbers and be able to tell me how much water I can push through. That's what the max flow in in a network is talking about. And we give you some polynomial time algorithms in this class. Basically, incremental algorithms kind of like D stress or kind of like Bellman Ford will that will incrementally update estimates to of a max flow and improve them over time. Then on the basically design paradigms will get more involved making your own divide and conquer algorithms, dynamic programming algorithms, greedy algorithms. Basically, we will go a lot more in depth of how to design these algorithms and these paradigms that we have so far.

And then the last thing we've only touched on complexity thus far. And in a sense, the second half of this class is only going to touch on complexity also. It's a very big field. But I will give you the tools to be able to prove that something is NP hard. Whereas we kind of just say that, oh, you know, there's this thing called a reduction. I didn't give you any problems in which you actually had to reduce one problem to another yet.

And so we'll look more at that in the next lectures. So we've got reductions. In a big sense, the second half is really just a natural extension to the first half plus some additional stuff, which we'll get to in a second. A big part of the next lectures is is randomization. It's a randomized analysis of algorithms that are not deterministic. It's not guaranteed that it will give you the same output every time or not guaranteed it will do the same computation over the course of the algorithm every time.

But it exploits some randomization. And we've mostly not touched on this except in one area. Where do we use randomization in hashing, right? When we use hashing, what are we doing? We changed the definition of correct versus efficient. We didn't really change the definition.

What we did, I guess, was we said that it was okay that sometimes our algorithm was slower than in expectation. That's what we meant there. We're relaxing the idea of efficient, but we're still saying it's good because most of the time it's good. So there's two types of randomized algorithms. They have these weird names based on being from regions of the world. There's Las Vegas algorithms.

They are always correct, but probably efficient. In a sense, this is what hashing is. I'm always going to give you the right thing, whether this thing is in my set or not. But some of the time it's inefficient. I have to look through a chain of lengths that's linear in the size of the things that I'm storing. And this is in contrast to a Monte Carlo algorithm, which is always efficient for some definition of efficient, but only probably correct.

And I mean, I could define you a hash table that has Monte Carlo semantics instead, say, for example, that I'm going to... It's going to be exactly the same as a hash table except instead of storing all the things that collide in a place, I just store the first two, say. Well, actually, that's actually always going to be efficient. I'm going to look through the things and see if it's in there and the chains that if I'm storing there, they only have two things. It's going to be always efficient. It's always going to give me a constant time, but some of the time it's going to be the wrong thing because I'm not storing everything in that chain.

So there's some probability that that's not going to be correct. This is where my background and statistics, I love Monte Carlo simulations. It's very interesting to me. And so that's a different kind of... Maybe I want my hash tables to always be fast, but I can afford to be wrong some of the time. I don't know.

In practice, this is actually sometimes a good trade-off in real systems. Sometimes it's okay to be wrong sometimes if we get good performance. But generally, we can do better if you allow randomization. And by better, I mean, usually we can get faster bounds on a lot of problems if we allow randomization and things aren't necessarily always correct or always efficient. So this is a big area in next lectures that require a lot more analysis using randomness and probability. So if you need some primers on that, that's going to be a good thing to maybe brush up on.

The next part of the course is changing what our definition of correct or efficient means. We've restricted ourselves in this class thus far to a class of problems where we only talk about integers, but there's tons of problems in this world, especially in scientific computing, where I want to be able to find out what this real number is. And I can't even store a real number on my computer. So what the heck, Emily? What are you talking about? I can't do that on a computer.

But what I can do is basically compute things in a numerical sense, in a mathematical, you know, numerical algorithms. And in next lectures, a lot of times we put this in the context of continuous optimization, continuous being the opportune word here, not discrete systems. Discrete systems. You have a continuum of possible solutions, real numbers essentially. How do we do this on a computer that's a discrete system? Basically what you can say is, well, I know that you can't return me a real number.

I got that. Or you can maybe have a model of computation that allows integers to respect other kinds of real numbers like radicals or rationals or something like that. And I can do manipulations on those. But really what these algorithms are usually about is computing real numbers, not completely, but to some bounded precision. And I pay for that precision. The more bits of precision I want on my number, I have to pay for them.

So this is basic, I think of these as approximation, approximation of real numbers to some precision, and I pay for precision with time. So let's say I want to compute the square root of a number. I could have an algorithm just like the algorithm or like long division, right? You all know the algorithm of long division. That's an algorithm. That's a procedure essentially using small numbers.

I'm only talking about the digits zero to nine here when I'm doing that algorithm. So it's a procedure that only uses small integers to compute arbitrary precision of a division. So that's an algorithm. And I have to pay time to get more digits. So that's an example of this kind of how we live in the world of real numbers when we have a discrete system. And then the last category I'd like to talk about here is really approximation algorithms.

Whereas this is kind of an approximation algorithm. I'm approximating my outputs. This is an approximation algorithm from the standpoint of there's a lot of problems I can't solve efficiently. They're NP hard. They're in X or even harder problems, but maybe I'm okay with not getting the optimal solution. So this is the domain of optimization problems.

So most of the dynamic programming problems that I gave you were optimization problems. They're the shortest path problems. Those are optimization problems. Basically, the possible outputs are ranked in some way, the distance of a path you return or something like that. They're ranked in some way. There is an optimal one, the one with the small symmetric or something like that.

Well, in an approximation algorithm, what I do is, okay, I get that it's computationally difficult for you to give me the longest simple path in this graph or the shortest possible route for my traveling salesman. But maybe that's okay. I mean, my engineering spidey sense tells me that within 10% is fine. So maybe instead of giving me the most optimal thing, can I give you an algorithm that's guaranteed to be within a certain distance of the optimal thing? Usually we're looking for a constant factor approximation, which is to which, you know, have low constants or maybe even have to do for worse if such things don't exist, right? Okay, so that is approximation algorithms.

Can we get close to an optimal solution in polynomial time? And then the last way we could change things is we could change our model of computation. We could basically change something about our computer to be put in some other weird paradigm of solving problems with more power essentially, or you're in a situation where there's less power. Okay, so change our model of computation. So what I've been talking to you about, I've been talking to you in terms of model of computation and a word RAM. And that essentially says I can do arithmetic operations, I can look up stuff in my memory in constant time.

But if I allocate a certain amount, I have to pay that amount. Anyway, I have to pay that amount in that kind of thing. So that's a word RAM model. But in actuality, all of your computers, it's a lot easier for me to find and read memory that's on my CPU in a register than it is for me to go out to the hard disk and actually read what that thing is. So we can add complexity to our model to better account for the cost of operations on my machine. One of those models is called a cache model.

It's basically a hierarchy of memory. I have registers on board my CPU, maybe I have an L1 cache that's close to my CPU. And then I have another set of caches and another set of caches maybe out to RAM. And reading from a hard disk, a solid state drive of some kind, that's the slowest thing to access. And I can put a cost associated with each of those things. And instead of having all of our operations be said to be constant, the constants are actually different.

And I have to pay for that difference. So that's the extending our model to be a little bit more realistic to our machines. Another way, another one we have is, we have computers right now that operate in classical physics that exploit things in classical physics. But in actuality, our world allows for even more complicated types of operations like quantum operations where you're exploiting entanglement or super position of different atoms to potentially get operations that I can act on my data that are actually provably stronger than the classical models in some sense. So this is a huge reason why there's a lot of work to be done, say in lots of industry research facilities figuring out these models. Because maybe if you can make a big enough quantum computer, you can break encryption and stuff in polynomial time.

And that's something that the NSA is probably definitely interested in. And we're not going to get into that. But you know, I mean, some people you look at artificial intelligence and things like discussions around artificial intelligence, my brain might be doing things like that, that a classical computer cannot, it could be using quantum superposition in some way. And our computers and that are in your phone and, and your laptop and things like that aren't exploiting these operations. So how could we ever get intelligence? Because in some sense, our brains are more powerful.

And so a lot of what AI should be looking into is what is the actual model of computation of our brains that can give us the power to have sentence, right? So that's kind of quantum computing. I don't know much about it, actually. And then there's things like maybe I have more than one CPU, I mean, most computers, all the computers you have, even the ones in your phones probably have multiple cores. In a sense, you have lots of CPUs running in parallel. So this is like, parallel computing basically says, it's cheap for me to make another computer potentially, if I have two computers running on the same problem, maybe I can get a two fold speed up on my, on my time in which it takes to solve my problem.

Now, I suppose I then had 100 CPUs running on a machine, maybe I can get 100 fold speed up. And actually in real life, 100 fold speed up makes a difference. It's like I'm waiting for this for 10 minutes, or am I waiting for this for 1000 minutes? That's, that's like a long time. I don't, I don't want to do that. But parallel computing, if I can get a 100 fold speed up, that might be a huge win.

But for some problems, it's not possible. If I have K CPUs, can I get a K factor speed up? It's not always possible to do. And so parallel computing is another paradigm in which there's a lot of interesting theory going on. There's a lot of complications there, because there are a couple different models, you can have, you know, multi-core setup where you have a lot of computers that are accessing the same bank of memory. And then you don't want them all to be reading and writing from them at different times, because you don't necessarily know what their state is, and, and you get these collisions, which are something that you really have to think about in this world.

Or you have situations where maybe I have a bunch of nanoflies or something that are going around, and they have a very small, you know, computer brain themselves, but they can talk to each other and pass information to each other, but they don't have access to one central network repository of information. That's what we called a, that's what we call a distributed parallel system, where all of the CPUs that you have, that you have can interact with each other, maybe locally, but don't have access to the same memory system. So they have to work together to learn information about the system. So, so that's a brief overview of the different directions. The, the first half of this class and theory in general could lead you to, into a huge array of, of different branches of theory and different problems that you could address with different types of computers. I know this was a very, a very high level lecture, maybe less applied than some, than some of you might like, but I hope this gives you a good understanding for what we covered in the first half of class, what could potentially be on a midterm exam and then where we're going with the, with the latter half of this class.

So good luck on your midterm and we'll see you for a second half of class.