Okay, welcome back to data structures. Today we're going to continue and complete our segment on by treating. So this is part two. If you missed part one, go back and watch part one. You have started screen share. Okay, so, okay. Last time we talked about binary trees in general, we had each node stored in item and also a left pointer and a right pointer to other nodes and a parent pointer to another node, right? This was an example of a tree. We had our small little generalized where we had B and C as age children. A would be the parent of B and C and also the root of our entire tree shown here on the slide. We defined the height of a node. We didn't really use that too much yet, but we're going to use it a lot today. So remember the height we showed earlier in red. So height is drawn here in red. The height of the node is the length of the longest downward path counting edges. So for B, for example, has a length of two paths. So we write a two. You can also think of it as if you just live within the subtree rooted at B, B subtree. Then what is the maximum depth of those nodes if you prefer to think about it that way? Either way is fine. In particular, we distinguished H, which is the height of the root node, as the height of the entire tree. What we achieved last time was basically all of our operations ran in order H time. So if we had subtree insert, subtree delete, subtree first and last, we could compute the predecessor and the successor of a node all in order H time. So as long as H was small, we were happy. And remember, what does the predecessor and successor mean? It's talking about an implicit order in the tree, which is what we call traversal order, which is defined recursively as recursively traverse the left subtree, then output the root, then recursively traverse the right subtree. So in our example, the traversal order, there we go, the traversal order, if you go all the way to the left, that was the first in the traversal order. So we have F, D, then we add B, then we go to the right subtree of B, which is E, then we have our root because we finished the left subtree of that root. So that's A, and then we have C. So there's an implicit linear order encoded by this tree. And the whole point of binary trees is that we can efficiently update the tree much faster than we could explicitly write down an order in an array or something like that. So binary trees let us quickly, and obviously right now, quickly is not so quick, right? Because everything is order H. And in the worst case, H is linear because we can have a tree that is linear. Remember we talked about if you picture like a linked list, a linear list. But today, we're going to guarantee that H is log N. And so the goal of today is to take all of the operations that run in order H time and get them to run in order log N time just by modifying the data structure that we've already seen. So we've done a lot of the hard work, just a little bit more work that we need to do today with something called AVL trees or height balance. But before we get there, I want to talk a little bit more. At the end of last lecture, we talked about how once you have these subtree operations, so I can enter and delete in the subtree, how do I actually use that to solve the problem that we care about in this class, which are sequence data structure and set data structure. So we talked mostly about the set data structure last time. So in general, we're going to define what traversal order we maintain by binary tree. And so for a set, because for the set interface, we're interested in doing queries like find next and find previous given a key. If it's not there, tell me the previous one or the next one. This is something we could do with the binary search. And so the big cool thing that binary search trees let us do if we let the traversal order always be all of the items stored in increasing key order, then we're effectively maintaining the items in order in the traversal order sense. Again, we're not explicitly maintaining them in order. Remember, we talked about how that was expensive, but we're maintaining a tree that represents items in key order. And so this lets us do a subtree find operation. So anyway, so we're doing this subtree find operation, which you could easily use to implement find and find previous and so on, right? We start at the root of the tree so we can say node equals root initially, and then we can recursively search for a key K as follows. So we're at some node. We have some node, right? And it has a left subtree, a right subtree I'm trying to draw here with triangles. And there's some item with some key. So if the key we're looking for is less than the nodes item, that means it's down in our left subtree. If the key, of course, is in the right, it's on the right. And so if it's in the left, we would recurse on node.left. If they're equal, that means that the item is the item that we're looking for, right? So you just return it or the node depending on what you're looking for. And if the key in here is greater than the key we're looking for, then we would recurse to the right. And if you think about it a little bit, this is exactly binary search on an array. It just happens to be on a tree instead. If you think of an array, what does binary search do? It looks at the key in the middle. We can draw that as our root. And then it recurses either on the left chunk or on the right chunk. And so if you happen to be in a perfect binary tree, it's simulating exactly binary search in an array. But that we're going to be able to maintain dynamically, not perfect anymore, but close. Whereas this we could not maintain in sorted order. So this is like a generalization of binary search to work on trees instead of on arrays. And for this reason, set binary trees are called binary search trees because they're the tree version of binary search. Many equivalent names, binary search tree is just another name for set binary tree. And the key thing that makes this algorithm work is the so-called binary search tree property, which is all the keys in the left subtree of a node are less than the root or of that node. And that key is less than all the keys in the right subtree. And this is true recursively all the way down. And so that's how you prove that this algorithm is correct by this property. Why is this true? Because if we can maintain traversal order to be increasing key, then that's exactly what traversal order means. It tells you all the things in the left subtree come before the root, which come before all the things in the right subtree. And how do we maintain things in increasing order? It's pretty easy, right? If you want to insert an item, where does it belong? Well, you do this search to find where it would belong if it was there. If it's there, you can overwrite the value stored with that key. If it's not, the search will fall off the tree at some point. And that's where you would insert a new node in your tree. What I want to focus on today is the other application. This is for representing a set, which is relatively easy, a challenge to set ourselves up for. But we need a little more work is to make sequence binary trees. Suppose I have a binary tree, and what I would like, we mentioned at the end of last time, is that I want the traversal order of my tree to be the sequence order, the order that I'm trying to represent that's changed by operations like insert app. So I'd just like to do the same thing. But now I have to think about how do I do a search? How do I do an insert app? And that sort of thing. And there's an algorithm for what I would like to work, but it's not quite going to work yet. So suppose I give you a subtree specified by node, there's all the descendants of that node, and I'd like to know what is in the traversal order of that subtree. Give me the ith node. So if I ask i equals zero, I want the leftmost descendant. If I ask for i equals the size of the tree minus one, then I want the rightmost descendant here. Rightmost descendant. And that was the first and the last in the subtree that we talked about. But we know how to find the first and last. You just walk left or walk right. But we don't know how to find the ith node. And I'd like to know what is in the traversal of that subtree. And the idea is size does matter here. So in particular, I mentioned size when I was talking about the last node in the sequence. The index of that node is size of subtree minus one. So let's define the size of a node to be the number of nodes in the subtree of that node. So we're going to call that subtree node here, including the node itself. So if I somehow knew the size, this seems important for understanding indexes. Let's just assume that I knew that magically in constant time. Let's just assume that we know that in constant time. Then I claim that the size of this left subtree, let's expand our diagram here, expanded now. Okay, we expanded it. We have the node. We have our same node as before. We have now a left subtree and a right subtree. So that node to the left, we've got node.left, the node now to the right, we've got node.right. They might not exist, but let's ignore those exceptional cases for now. Let's suppose we knew not only the size of the node, but we knew the size of node.left. So that is the size of the tree on the left. We're going to call that n sub l. And let's suppose that there are n sub l nodes down there. I claim that lets me do the equivalent of a binary search because I'm looking for some index i. And if i is less than n sub l, then I know that it must be down there. For example, if i equals zero, it's going to be in the left subtree as long as n sub l is greater than zero. So that's exactly this check. If i less than n sub l, I'm going to recurse to the left call subtree of node.left i. That's what's written. If i equals n sub l, if you think about it for a second, so n sub l is the number of nodes here. So that means that that node has index n sub l. The index of that node is n sub l. And so if i equals, if the one index that we're looking for is that one, then you just return that one. Right? We're done. And otherwise, i is greater than n sub l. And that means that the node we're looking for is in the right subtree because it comes after the root. That's what traversal order means. So if we define it to be sequence order, then we know all the things that come after this node, which is index n sub l, must be on the right side. Now, when we recurse down into lower subtrees, our numbering system changes because node.left, because for node.left, zero is in the lower left of the triangle. And then for node.right, it's in the lower right side of the triangle. So we need to do a little bit of subtraction here, which is when we recurse to the right, we take i minus n sub l minus one minus n sub l for those guys, minus one for the root node. Right? And that will give us the index we're looking at for within this subtree. So my point is this algorithm is basically the same as the find algorithm. But this one uses keys because we're dealing with a set. And in sets, we assume items have keys. Now, items don't have to have keys. In fact, we're not touching the items at all. We're just asking, what is the ith item in my sequence, which is the same thing as what is the ith item in my traversal order, which is also the same thing as asking, what is the ith node in the traversal order? Right? And so this algorithm gives it to you exactly the same way in order h time. Okay. Now, I'm not just going to show you the operations, but you can use subtree at to implement get at set at. You can find, you know, you can just find the appropriate node and return the item or modify the item, or you can use it to most most crucially, you can use it to insert at delete at this is a new thing we've never been able to do before. What do you do just like before if we're trying to insert an item, then I search for that item. So if we're trying to insert at I, for example, I look for I, and then for insert at I, I want to add a new item just before that item. And conveniently, we already have I didn't mention, but we have a subtree insert. We had two versions before and after. I think we covered after, right? Which which I use successor before I use predecessor. But we can just call subtree insert before that before at that node. And boom, we will have a new item just before it. And so so magically, right, we've, we've somehow we've inserted in the middle of our sequence. And all of our indices update because I'm not storing indices. Instead to to search for an item at index I, I'm going to use search algorithm. But there's a problem. What's what's the problem? I don't know if we want to talk about that yet. But there's a problem. It seems a little too good to be true, right? I insert it in the middle of the street. And then somehow I can magically search and still find the item, even though all the indices to the right incremented by one, right? It's almost true. Because we have to update the sizes, right? I didn't say, I didn't say, how do I compute the sizes to the size to the left of the subtree? So that's our next topic. We're almost done. This will actually work. It's really quite cool. But for it to work, we need something called our subtree. Let's get to this now. Subtree augmentation, which I'll talk about generally here. And then we'll apply it to to size. So the idea with subtree augmentation is that each node in our binary tree can store a constant number of fields. And in, in particular, if these fields are of a particular type, maybe I'll maybe let's call them properties. I'm going to define a subtree property to be something that can be computed from the properties of the node's children. So I should say this is a node. So children are, we've got node dot left, node dot right, right, for our children. You can also access constant amount of other stuff, for example, the node itself. But the point of a subtree property is it's downward looking. If I have a node and I want to compute some property about it, we want to store, store p of the node, for example, we've got here. And suppose we already know p, the property computed for the left subtree or for the left node, and we already know the property for the right node, then what I'd like is for this to be computable in constant time. So I can compute p of that node given p of the left node and p of the right node. That's a subtree property. Now, in particular, size is a substrate property. Why? Because I can write this kind of recurrence, node dot size equals node dot left dot size, plus node dot right dot size plus one. The size of the entire subtree here called node is the size to the left subtree plus size to the right subtree plus one for that node itself. So that, this is an update rule. It takes constant time to evaluate. It's two additions. So I claim that as long as my property has this feature, I can maintain it dynamically as I'm changing the tree. Now, this is a little bit of a forward reference because we haven't exactly said how we're going to change the tree yet. Let me pose a question to all of you thinking about it at home. If node dot size is recursive, then how is it happening in constant time? Think about that for a second. One natural way you can think of this as a recursion, which gives you a recursive algorithm. So I could have written size of node equals size of node dot left. And that would give you a linear time algorithm to count the size. And if you don't have any information, this is what you would do. And that would be very painful. So that would make this algorithm really slow. If I'm calling size as a recursive function, it's bad. What I'm instead doing is storing the sizes on every single node and precomputing this. So in fact, I'm going to define the size of node in... So this is the definition mathematically. But the algorithm for the size of node function is just going to be return node dot size. So that's constant time. So the challenge now is I have to keep these sizes up to date no matter what I do in the tree. And you could look back at last lecture and see, okay, what were the changes that I did in a tree? We only did changes during insert and delete. And when we did insert and delete what they ended up doing in the end, they add or remove a leaf of that tree. Remember, a leaf was a node with no children. So let's just think about it. If I add a new leaf in a tree, which sub trees change? Well, which subtree contains that node? Let's think of it that way. It's in its own new subtree. Then it's in its parent subtree and its grandparents subtree and the overall subtree. In general, these nodes are called the ancestors of the node that we added and the other ones and the others are the ones that update. The subtree on our other side wouldn't change. It didn't change size. And it's because it's a subtree property. No subtree property will change because that subtree would be untouched. And also, if we remove a leaf, then the subtrees that change are exactly its former ancestors. Cool. Okay. So we're going to update those order H ancestors in order of the tree. So what do we mean by update then? What do we mean by update? Let's apply a rule for size. It's the rule where node dot size equals node of left plus, I'm sorry, size of left node plus size of right node plus one. But in general, the subtree property gives me an update rule that takes constant time. So we have this. So when I make a change in order H time, because I'm making H calls to this constant time algorithm, I can update a constant number of subtree properties. Very, very powerful here. Data structure augmentation in algorithms is super useful. You're going to use it probably in problem sets in this class. We'll use it again today. Okay. So some examples of subtree properties. Here we go. Common ones, we've got some, we've got product min, max, sum of squares, all sorts of things. Some feature of every node in this subtree. In fact, subtree size is an example of such a thing. It's the sum over all the nodes in the subtree of the value one. It's another way to say count the number of nodes. But you could also say what's the sum of the keys in these nodes? Or you could say what's the maximum of keys in these nodes? Or you could say what's the maximum value in these nodes? You can take any property. It doesn't have to be key. It doesn't have to be anything in particular. It's very powerful. You can take all sums, products, and maintain them as long as they're downward looking, as long as you're only thinking about the subtree. Some examples of things you cannot maintain are not a nodes index. So if you get a little bit too excited about augmentation, you might think, oh, I can do everything. I needed to support subtree app. Or let's just say get app globally. I wanted to know what's the ith node in my tree? Well, I'll just use data structure, augmentation, and store in every node what its index zero through n minus one is. I can't maintain that efficiently because if I insert at the beginning of my traversal order, then all the indices change. So that's example of an edit. So if I insert a new node, every node changes as its index. Index is not a subtree property. And that's why we can't maintain it because it depends on all the nodes in the tree. Or it depends on all the nodes. It's all the predecessors, I should say. So that's why you have to be careful. Don't use global properties of the tree. You can only use subtree properties. Another example is depth. Depth is annoying to maintain, but it's not quite obvious why yet. We'll see that in a moment. So the rest of today is going to, it's about going from order h to order log n, which is what the slide is showing us. So at this point, you should believe that we can do all of our sequence data structure operations in order h time, except for build and iterate, which take linear time. And that we can do all of the set operations in order h time, except build and iterate, which take n log n and n, respectively. And our goal is now bound h by log n. Okay. We know it's possible at some level because there are trees that have logarithmic height, but we also know that we have to be careful because there are some bad trees. Remember, like our chains, you can picture the chain or linear trees. So if h equals log n, we call this a balanced binary tree. Okay. There are many balanced binary trees in the world, probably dozen or two, lots of different data structures. So we need a new tool for manipulating a tree. Well, we've done so far. We've done some swapping. We did adding and removing the leaf, but that's not enough. We're going to need something to let us guarantee logarithmic height. And that's something we're going to call rotation. So what does this something else need to do? It's just a tool for rebalancing a tree here. So it should not change the data that's represented by the tree. What, I guess, what is the data represented by the tree? It's the traversal order, right? Traversal order. We're not allowed to touch it. It's already defined two different ways, depending on whether you're using a set or a sequence. So we want to modify the tree in a way that doesn't modify the traversal order. So we're exploiting redundancy. If you wrote down the traversal order in any array, there's exactly one representation of a given order. But in a tree, there's many representations, right? It could be a long line. It could be a balanced thing. They could represent the exact same order on the nodes if you labeled them right. In fact, there are exponentially many different representations of that same thing. And we're going to exploit that, that same order and define. This is just the thing you need to know. Let's label all of these. So we've got X and Y, ABC here, very powerful tool in all the tree data structures, which are most of the data structures. And they're called rotate right of Y and rotate left of X or right rotate of Y and left rotate of X. So if we have this tree, which let's just, we're black boxing our subtrees into little triangles. If I have a node, it has, and it has a left child, then I'm allowed to right rotate that edge, which means take away, rotate it 90 degrees kind of that edge. You can think of rewriting it as we have rewritten it to the right. So we have both of our pictures going on. And you might also have to be keeping track of the parent pointer. The parent pointer moves around. So X and Y are switching places, but we couldn't just swap those items around because that would change the traversal order. So in the left picture, X comes before Y because X is in the left subtree of Y in reverse, in traversal order. And on the right side, now Y is in the subtree, the right subtree of X. So it comes after X. So in both cases, X comes before Y. And indeed, in all of the pictures, the traversal order, I mean, not just for X and Y, but also for, for A, B, and C, the traversal order is consistent, right? It's A, X, B, Y, C, where when I write a triangle, I mean recursively the traversal order of all the things in that triangle. So if you just apply the traversal order algorithm here, here on the left versus here, you get the same output, which means these operations preserve traversal order. Great. So this is the thing that we can do in a tree that won't affect any of the stuff we've done so far. It's a tool that we can just use to rebalance. Notice how deep things are in the tree changes. Our problem with a linear tree is that there are some nodes of linear depths. We want to get rid of those, right? How? Well, we could take those edges, start rotating them up. If you look at depths in the left picture, A and B are deeper than C, right? And in the right picture, B and C are deeper than A. So it's a tradeoff. One moved up, one moved down, one stayed at the same depth. So, hopefully, if A is too deep and C is too shallow, they could trade off like this. It may sound difficult, but in fact, there's a pretty simple way to do this, which are called AVL trees that maintain balance in a particular way called height balance. That is, if we take the height of no dot right minus height of no dot left, so, this thing is called skew of the node. And I want this to always be minus one, zero, or plus one. So, this is saying that if I have any node, if I look in its left subtree and its right subtree, I measure their heights. Remember, that's downward distance, maximum distance to a leaf. I measure the height of this tree, maximum height, and I measure the height of this tree. I want those to be within one of each other. Ideally, they're equal. That would be the perfect case, but let's let them differ by one. So, maybe, I've shown here, maybe this is K and this is K plus one, like it maybe could be K and K minus one in this picture. In this picture, what is the height of node X? This is good practice here. The height of the node X, K plus two, right? And what is the longest path from node X to a leaf? Well, it could go through the left subtree. That would be length K plus one because it's K in there plus one for the edge. Or it could be in the right subtree, and that's K plus one plus one. So, the biggest is to the right. So, the height, if I told you the height of these subtrees, we can derive the height. If I told you the height of these subtrees, then we could derive the height of the node. We're going to use that a lot in a moment here. So, the first claim is that if I could maintain height balance, then I would guarantee that H equals log N, right? So, in other words, height balance implies balance. So, let's prove that first quickly. And then the interesting part is how do we actually prove, or how do we maintain the balance property? We're going to do that using rotations. But how is a big question here, right? So, why does height balance imply balance? What this is saying is that all height balance trees have logarithmic height. So, what I'd like to think about is sort of the least balanced height balanced tree. The least balanced one is going to have every node a mismatch. So, let's say the left subtree is shallower than the right subtree by one shown here, and recursive all the way down. So, every node has a gap. So, we call it skew of one, which we show by writing a dissenting arrow rightward. So, dissenting rightward arrow since the right one is higher than the left subtree. So, shown in the slides here. So, the easy way to think about this is just sort of our worst case. This is going to be the fewest nodes for the maximum depth. Let's just count how many nodes are in that tree, right? I'm going to write that as a recurrence, which is the number of nodes in a tree of height H. So, if this whole tree has height H, then the left tree has height H minus 2, and the right one has height H minus 1. So, then how many nodes are in the left tree? Well, it's a recurrence. I'm going to write, right? So, the left will be n sub H minus 2, and the right will be n sub H minus 1. And then I just count how many nodes are in this picture. It's n H minus 1 plus n H minus 2 plus 1 for our top node. Right? And n H minus 1 plus n H minus 2 plus 1 from top. Yeah. So, now you might ask, what is n H recurrence for? Right? I hope maybe you're thinking that. But it's the number of nodes in this sort of worst case if the worst case has total height H. So, you can think of it as what is the minimum number of nodes I could have in an AVL tree, which is a height balanced tree that has a height H in a height balanced tree. Okay. Okay. So, now I just need to solve this recurrence. Hopefully, does this recurrence look familiar-ish? It's like Fibonacci numbers, right? If I remove the plus one, it's Fibonacci. And if you happen to know the Fibonacci, the Fibonacci numbers grow as like a golden ratio to the n, then we know that this is exponential, which is what we want because if n H is exponential in H, that means H is logarithmic in n because log is inverse of exponential. But maybe you don't know about Fibonacci numbers. And so, we can still easily show that this is exponential, right? I want to prove that it's at least exponential because that gives me that H is at most logarithmic. So, we need a lower bound. And so, we have these two terms, which are hard to compare, and n H minus one and n H minus two, it's still kind of ugly, but we're allowed to be a little bit sloppy. And we'll see if we're not too sloppy, we'll still in fact get an exponential answer. Okay. So, let's just, again, not being too sloppy here, but let's just make them equal. So, this is a true statement, in fact, strictly greater than, so our second step here. Why? Because I removed the plus one. That should only make something smaller. And I replaced n H minus one with n H minus two. So, here I'm implicitly using a fact, which is obvious by induction, that this tree on height, if I take the left tree versus the right tree, the right one has more nodes than the left one. And if I have larger height, this construction is going to build a bigger tree, at least as big, it doesn't even need to be strictly bigger. So, certainly, n H minus one is greater than or equal to n H minus two, right? Now, this two times n H minus two, this is two times n H minus two, yeah. And that's an easy recurrence, that's just powers of two. So, I keep multiplying by two and subtracting two from H. So, this solves two to the H over two. That's how that solves. And that is exponential. So, this implies that the height is always at most two times log n. This two, anyway, okay. And if you just invert that formula, that was the number of, this was a number of nodes that's going to be at least two to the H over two. And so, H is at most two log n. So, it's not log n, that would be perfect, right? But it's within a factor of two of log n. So, AVL trees are always quite balanced. Number of levels is at most double what you need to store n nodes, okay. The big remaining challenge is, how do we maintain this height balance property using rotations? We have all the ingredients lined up for us. We have, we have subtree augmentation, right? What does that let us do? It's relevant to AVL trees. Well, it lets me store height. I need to be able to compute the height of a node that in general takes linear time because I have to look all the way down, all the downward paths, all the leaves within that subtree. But height is a subtree property. Why? Because node.height equals one plus max of node.left.height and node.right.height and of max. This equation, or I guess it's an assignment operation, is the thing we've been doing over and over. So, this is a general update rule. It matches our subtree property pattern. If I have the property of left and right, I can compute it for node. And that also takes constant time to do. And so, it's a subtree property. And so, I can maintain through all the things I'm doing, the height of every node. Oh, and by the way, whenever I do a rotation, I'm always going to have to update my subtree properties. When I rotate a left edge, so we're looking at the left side, A doesn't change, B doesn't change, C doesn't change. So, that's good. But X's subtree does change, right? And now has Y. It didn't before. So, now we're going to have to also update the augmentation here and Y on the right. And we're going to have to update the augmentation in X on the right. And we're going to have to update the augmentation of all the ancestors of X eventually. So, rotation is locally just changing a constant number of pointers. So, I usually think of rotations as taking constant time. But eventually, we will have to do, this is constant time locally. But we will need to update H ancestors in order to store, in order to keep all of our augmentations up to date. But we'll worry about that later. Okay. So, now we have the height of all the nodes. Okay. So, we can compute the skew of all the nodes, right? We have this rotation operation. And we want to maintain our height balance property. Height of node left, left and right of every node is plus or minus one or zero. So, I said at the beginning, the only things that change the tree are when we insert or delete a new node. And the way we implemented those so far is to add or remove a leaf. So, we still should be thinking about adding or removing a leaf. The problem is, when I add a new leaf, now maybe that tree is higher than it used to be. So, some node may no longer be height balanced. But because height is a subtree property, the only nodes we need to check are the ones up the ancestor path. And there's only log n of them because now height is log n. That's just what we proved, right? As long as we have this property. So, what I want to do is check all the ancestor nodes in sequence from bottom up and find one that's out of balance. So, let's take the lowest out of balance node. We're going to call that x. And because we just insert or deleted a single leaf, it's only out of balance by one. Because we only changed height, one height went up by one or one height went down by one. And before, all of our skews were plus or minus one or zero. So, now the bad case is when it's plus or minus two. If it happens to still be in this range for all the nodes, then we're happy. But if it happens outside this range, it's only going to be out by one. So, this means that the skew is n plus plus two or minus two. And let's just call it then two by symmetry. So, in my picture, I'm showing a double right arrow to say that that subtree is two higher than the other subtree. So, that's bad. And we want to fix it, right? How can we fix it? Okay, the obvious thing to do is to rotate that right edge. If we rotate, the left subtree should go down by one. And the right subtree should go up by one. And that works most of the time. So, case one is if the skew, so case one is the skew of y. What is y? I want y to be the right child of x because we have a positive skew. We know there's a right child, right? Now, because this was the lowest bad node, we know that y is actually good. It's either right heavy or even the two sub trees have the same height or left heavy. The easy cases are when the skew of y is either one or zero, which I'll show in a picture on the next slide. And we added some labels to make them consistent to show heights and stuff. So, let's talk about... Okay, so here's... Okay, if we compute the heights, this one for y, we've got a right leaning. So, we're showing the arrow. x is doubly right leaning. Two right arrows here. Because we have one with height k plus one and one with height k minus one, that's that. But if we do a right rotation on x, we will get exactly what we want. So, if we copy our labels here on ABC, we have k minus one, k minus one, we've got another k. And then we recompute. That means x has height k and y has height k plus one. And now all the nodes in our new picture that we've highlighted, A, B, and C, haven't changed. They were height balanced before. They still are. But now x and y... x wasn't height balanced before. y was. Now, both x and y are height balanced. So, that's case one. In case two, let's talk about this. In case two, the skew of y is flat, which means that B on the left is at k. And B on the right is a k. And x on the right is a k plus one. And y on the right is a k plus two. But still, all the nodes are balanced, height balanced. They're still plus or minus one. So, those are easy cases. Unfortunately, they're still a hard case. Case three. But there's only one, and it's not that much harder. It's when skew of y is minus one. In this case, we need to look at the left child of y. And to be alphabetical, let's bring in... let's bring in a... a... z. So, x again is double right arrow. Z, we now have left arrow, and we still have our letter y. So, we have A, B, C, and D potential sub trees hanging off them. I've labeled the heights of those things. They are We've got k minus one or k minus two. There's k minus one. We... now, if we're going to compute the inside, so y is the height k for that to be left leaning. So, that means z is k plus one, and x is k plus two. But the problem is the height of z is two higher than the height of A. This case, if I do the same rotation we did before, things get actually worse. I'll just tell you the right thing to do here is right, rotate z, and left, rotate x. This is... this is one thing you need to memorize. And so, if we look at the results of that, as long as we know how rotation works, then we know that this thing works. And we should say works, meaning it preserves the traversal order, and we can maintain all the augmentations. So, now, if I copy over those labels, the height labels, we have k minus one for A, k minus one or k minus two for B. The biggest one is k minus one. D is k minus one. And so, x and z will be k, y will be k plus one, and lo and behold, we have a nice height-balanced tree in all three cases for this one node. Now, this was the lowest node, right? Once we update that one, it could be that we changed the height of the root before it was k plus two. Now, we've got k plus one. And so, now, we have to check the parent. Maybe the parent is out of balance. And we just keep walking up the node and also maintain all the augmentations as we go. Then, we'll keep track of height and subtree size if we want them or any other augmentations. And after order h ops, after order h operations, we will have restored that height-balanced property, which means all the way through h equals order log n. And so, all of our operations are now magically order log n. Okay, we will- You have stopped screen share. Pick this up next time.