Okay, welcome to the next lecture of CSU 381 today. We're going to talk about hashing. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Last lecture, we talked about data set data structures, storing things so that you can query items by their key by what they by what they in stringingly are versus like last time, last last time, we talked about sequence data structures where we impose an external order on these items and we want to maintain those items. We want you to maintain those, that external order. I'm not supporting operations where I'm looking stuff up based on what they are. That's what the set interface is for. So we're going to be talking a little bit about a little bit more about the set interface today. We've seen two ways of implementing the set interface. One using just a an unsorted array. I threw these things in an array and I could do a linear scan of my items to support basically any of these operations that we saw. And then we saw slightly better data structure at least for the fine operations. Can I look something up whether this is key in my set interface? Whether this key is in my set interface? We can do it faster. We can do that in log n time with a build overhead that's about n log n because I showed you three ways to sort. Two of them were n squared. One of them was n log n, which is as good as we showed you how to do last time, right? And I should back up too. I don't believe that we got to insertion sort but n squared there. So the question then becomes how can I build that data structure faster? That'll be the subject of the future lecture that we're going to go into. But this week we're going to concentrate on this static find. We got log n, which is an exponential improvement over linear, right? But the question now becomes can I do it faster than log n time? And what we're going to do at the first part of this lecture is show you that no, you can't do faster than, you know, you can't do it faster than log n time. But we were under this constraint, right? We can't do it faster than log n time in the caveat that we are in a slightly more restrictive model of computation that we were in last time. And so then if we're not in that more constrained model of computation, we can actually do it faster. Log n is already pretty good. Log n is not going to be larger than like 30 for any problem that you're going to be talking about in the real world on real computers. But a factor of 30 is still bad. I would prefer to do faster with those constant factors when I can. I guess it's not a constant factor. It's a logarithmic factor. But you get what I'm saying here. So what we're going to do is first prove that you can't do faster. What we finding our key element means I have a key. I have a bunch of items that have keys associated with them. And I want to see if one of the items that I'm sorting contains a key that is the same as the one that I searched for. The item might contain other things, but in particular, it has a search key that I'm maintaining the set on so that it supports find operations, search operations based on that key quickly. Hopefully that makes sense. So there's the find one that we want to improve. We also want to improve. We also want to improve the insertion and delete. We want to make this data structurally dynamic because we might do those operations quite a bit. And so this lecture is about optimizing those three things. So first, I'm going to show you that we can't do faster than log n for find, which is a little weird. The model of computation I'm going to be proving, I'm going to be proving this lower bound on how I'm going to approach this is I'm going to say that any way that I store these, the items that I'm storing in the status structure for any way I see these things, any algorithm of this certain type is going to require at least logarithmic time. That's what we're trying to prove. And the model of computation that's weaker than what we've been talking about previously is what I'm going to call the comparison model. The comparison model here. And a comparison model means is that the items, the objects that I'm storing, I can think of them as black boxes. I don't get to touch these things except the only way that I can distinguish between them is to say given a key and an item or two items, I could do a comparison on those keys. Are these keys the same? Is this key bigger than this one? Is it smaller than this one? Those are the only operations that I get to do with them. Say if the keys are numbers, I don't get to look at what that number is. I just get to take those two keys and compare them. And actually all of the search algorithms that we saw last time were comparison sort algorithms. What you did was we stepped through the program. At some point we came to a branch and we looked at the two keys and you branched based on whether one key was bigger than another. That's a comparison. And when you move some stuff around, that's our general paradigm. Those three sorting operations lived in this comparison model. We've got comparison operations like are they equal? Are they less than shown here? Are they equal? Are they less than? Are they greater than? Maybe greater than or equal to, less than or equal to. Generally, you have all these operations that you could do. Also, maybe they're not equal. But the key thing here is that there are only two possible outputs to each of these comparators. There's only one thing that I can branch on. And it's going to branch into two different lines. It's either true and I do some other computation or it's false and I'll do a different set of computation. Does that make sense? So what I'm going to do is I'm going to give you a comparison, an algorithm in the comparison model and it's what we like to call a decision tree showing here on the slide. So if I specify an algorithm to you, the first thing it's going to do if I don't compare items at all, I'm kind of screwed, right? Because I'll never be able to tell if my key's in there or not, how they're related to each other. So I've got to do some comparison. I'll do some computation. Maybe I find out the length of the array. I do some constant time stuff. But at some point I'll do comparison and I'll branch. I'll compare to a node and if the comparison is maybe less than, right shown here, if it's true, I'm going to go to the left in computation. If it's false, I'm going to go to the right in my computation. And I'm going to keep doing that, those various computations, until we get down to some leaf in which we're not branching anymore. The internal nodes here are representing comparisons. The leaves are representing, I stopped my computation obviously here, but we're outputting something. Hopefully that makes sense what we're trying to do here. I'm changing my algorithm to be put in this kind of graphical way where I'm branching what my program could possibly do based on the comparisons that we need to do. I'm not actually counting the rest of the work that the program does. I'm really only looking at those comparisons because I know that I need to compare some things eventually to figure out what my items are. And if that's the only way I can distinguish items, then I have to do those comparisons to find out. All right. So what we have is a binary tree that's representing the comparisons done by the algorithm. So it starts at one comparison, then it branches. How many leaves do you have in your tree? What does that question mean in terms of the program? Think about that. What is the output to my search algorithm? Maybe it's an index of an item that contains this key or maybe I return the item that is the output, the item of the thing that I'm storing. And I'm storing n things, so I need at least n outputs because I need to be able to return any of the items that I'm storing based on a different search parameter if it's going to be correct. And I actually need one more output, of course, right? Why do we need one more output if it's not in there? So any correct comparison searching algorithm, I'm doing some comparisons to find this thing, needs to have at least n plus one leaves, otherwise it can't be correct because I could look up the one that I'm not returning in that set and it would never be able to return that value if that makes sense. For a data structure n is the number of things stored in that data structure at that time, so the number of items in the data structure, that's what it means in all of these tables. So now we get to the fun part. How many comparisons does this algorithm have to do? Think about that. We have to do as many comparisons in the worst case as the longest route to leaf path in this tree because as I'm executing this algorithm, I'm going down my tree, always branching down, and at some point I'll get to a leaf. And in the worst case, if I happen to need to return this particular output, then I'll have to walk down the longest thing, the longest path. So then the longest path is the same as the height of the tree. So then the question becomes, what is the minimum height of any binary tree that has n plus one leaves? You can actually state a recurrence for that and solve that. It is long n. The best you can do if this is a balanced binary tree. So the minimum height is going to be at least log n height or the minimum height is logarithmic. So it's actually theta shown here. But if I just said height here, I would be lower bounding by height. I could have linear height if I just changed comparisons down one by one, if I was doing a linear search, for example. So this is saying that if I'm just restricting to comparisons, I have to spend at least logarithmic time to be able to find whether this key is in my set. But I don't want logarithmic time. I want faster. So how can we do that? I have one operation in my model of computation that allows me to do faster, which allows me to do something stronger than comparisons. Comparisons have a constant branching factor. In particular, I can, if I do this operation, this constant time operation, I can branch to two different locations. It's kind of like an if, then kind of statement, if or else, in fact, if I had a constant branching factor for any constant here, if I had three or four, if it was bounded by a constant, the height of this tree would still be bounded by a log base, the constant of that number of leaves. So I need in some sense to be able to branch a non-constant amount. So how can I branch a non-constant amount? This gets a little tricky, right? We had this really neat operation in the random access machine that we could randomly go to any place in memory in constant time based on a number. That was a really powerful thing because within a single constant time operation, I could go to any space in memory. That's potentially much larger than linear branching factor, depending on the size of my model and the size of my machine. So that's a very powerful operation. And we use that to find quicker here. We've kind of been using it implicitly in some of our sequence data structure things. What we're going to do is if I have an item that has a key 10, I'm going to keep an array and store that item 10 spaces away from the front of the array right at index 9, right? Or keep the 10th index. If I store that item at that location in memory, I can use this random access to that location and see if there's something there. If there's something there, return that item. Hopefully this is making sense. This is what we call direct access array. It's really no different than the arrays that we've been talking about earlier in class. We've got an array and if I have an item here with key equals 10, then we stick it in the 10th place. Now, I can only store one item with the key 10 in my thing. And that's one of the stipulations we had on our set data structures. If we tried to insert something with the same key as something already stored there, we're going to replace the item. That's what the semantics of our set interface was. But that's okay. That's satisfying the conditions of our set interface. So if we store it there, that's fantastic. How long does it take to find if we have an item with the key 10? It takes constant time. Worst case. Great. How about inserting or deleting something? Again, constant time. We've solved all our problems. That's amazing. What is not amazing about this though? Why don't we just do this all the time then? How about the fact that we don't know how high the numbers go? Let's go back to our example of BYUID numbers. Let's say I'm storing a number associated with the 20 or 30 of you that are in this classroom. I'm storing your BYUIDs. How big are those numbers? Those numbers are nine digits. Pretty long numbers. So what I would need to do if I was storing your keys as BYUIDs, I would need an array that has indices that span the entire space of nine digit numbers. And that's like 10 to the nine. 10 to the nine is the size of a direct access road off to build to be able to use this technique to create a direct access array to search on your BYUIDs when there's really only 20 or 30 of you in here. So 20 or 30 is an N that's much smaller than the size of the numbers that I'm trying to store. What I'm going to use as a variable to talk about the size of numbers I'm storing, I'm going to say U here. I'm going to say U is the maximum size of any number that I'm storing. It's the size, let's call it universe of space of keys that I'm storing. So to have a direct access array of that size, I have to allocate that amount of space. And so if that is much bigger than N, then I'm not really in a great place because I'm using much more space, right? And these order operations are bad also because essentially if I'm storing these things non-continuously, I kind of have to scan down the thing to find the next element, for example. And U, the largest key, we're assuming integers here, integer keys. So in the comparison model, we could store any arbitrary objects that support a comparison. Here we really need to have integer keys or else we're not going to be able to use those as addresses. So we're making an assumption on the inputs that I can only store integers now. I can't store arbitrary objects, items with keys. And in particular, I also need to, this is a subtlety that's in the WordRAM model, how can I be assured that these keys can be looked up in constant time? Okay, I have this little CPU, I've got some number of registers that can act upon how big are those registers? Okay, right now, there's 64 bits, right? We talked about this. But in general, let's call them W, shown here. Let's call them W. They're the size of your word on your machine. So two to the W is the number of addresses I can access. And if I'm going to be able to use this direct accessory, I need to make sure that U then is less than two to the W if I want these operations to run in constant time. If I have kinds that are much longer than this, I'm going to need to do something else. But this is kind of the assumption. In this class, when we give you an array of integers or an array of strings or something like that on your problems or in your exams, the assumption is unless I give you bounds on the size of those things, like the number of characters in your string or the size of the number in whatever, you can assume that those things will fit into one word of memory. Okay, so W is the word size of your machine, the number of bits that your machine can do operations on in constant time. So we have this problem. We're using way too much space when we have a large universe of keys. So how do we get around that problem? You guys have any ideas? What's the alternative? What's an alternative? Right? Instead of allocating a lot of space, we allocate less space. Let's allocate less space. All right, so this is our space of keys U. But instead, I want to store these things in a direct access array of maybe the size n, something like the order of the things that I'm going to be storing. I'm going to relax that and say, let's make this a length m that's around the size of the things that I'm storing, right? It's close to it. And what I'm going to do is I'm going to try to map this space of keys, this large U space of keys from zero to U minus one, something like that, down to zero to M minus one. I'm going to want to function, we're going to call this h, which maps this range down to a smaller range. I'm going to have some function that takes that large base of keys, sticks them down here down in our smaller set. And instead of starting at an index of the key, I'm going to put the key through this function here, this function, the key space into a compressed space and store it at that index location. Well, what's the problem here? The problem is the potential that we might have, the potential that we might have to store more than one thing at the same index location. If I have a function that matches our big space down to our small space, I have to have multiple of these things going to the same places here then, right? It can't be objective. Just based on our pigeonhole principle, I have more of those things. At least two of them have to be going to something over there together. In fact, if I have, say, U is bigger than n squared, for example, for any function, I give you that maps that large space down to the small space, and of those things will map to the same place by that principle. Kind of interesting. So if I choose a bad function here, then I'll have to store n things at the same index location. And if I go there, I have to check whether any of those are the things that I'm looking for. I haven't gained anything. I really want a hash function that will evenly distribute keys over that space. But we have a problem here, right? If we need to store multiple things at a given location in memory, can't do that. I have one thing I can put there. So I have two options on how to deal, what I call collisions. I have two items here, like A and B. These are different keys in my universe of space. But it's possible that they both map down to some hash that has the same value. If I first hash A and A is put in, where do I put B? There's two options. There's two solutions here. One is I maybe choose M to be larger than N. Then there's going to be extra space in there. I'll just stick it in somewhere in the existing array. I'll just stick it in the existing array. How would I find an open space? It's a little complicated, but it's a technique called open addressing, which is much more common than the technique we're going to be talking about today in implementations here. Open uses an open addressing scheme, which is essentially finding another place in the array to put this collision. Open addressing is notoriously difficult to analyze, so we're not going to do that in this class. There's a much easier technique here. Instead of storing it somewhere else in the existing direct access array, which we usually call the hash table, instead of storing it somewhere in the hash table, we'll instead at that key store a pointer to another data structure, some other data structure that can store a bunch of things just like any sequence data structure, like a dynamic array or a linked list or anything. All I need to do is be able to stick a bunch of things on there when there are collisions. When I go up to look for that thing, I'll just go through all the things in the data structure and see if my key exists. We want to make sure that those additional data structures, which we'll call chains, we want to make sure those chains are short. I don't want them to be long. So what we're going to do when we have collision here, instead I'll have a pointer to some, maybe make it a dynamic array or a linked list or something. And I'll put a here, a here, and I'll put b here. And then later, when I look up my key k or look up a or b, let's look up b, then we'll put that through the hash function. I'll go to that index, I'll go to the data structure, the chain associated to that index, and I'll look at all those items. We just do a linear find. We could look, put any data structure here, but we're going to look at that one. See if it's b, it's not b, then look to the next. It is b, return yes, right? Hopefully this is starting to make a little bit of sense. That's an idea called chaining. You can put anything you want there. Commonly, we talk about putting a linked list, but you can put a dynamic array there. You can put a sorted array there to make it easier to check whether the key is there. You can put anything you want there. The point of this lecture is trying to show that there's a choice of hash functions we can make to make sure that these chains are small so that it really doesn't matter how we see them there. Because if there's a constant number of things stored there, I can just look at all of them and do whatever I want and still get a constant time. So at initialization, what is stored there? Initially, it points to an empty data structure. I'm just going to initialize all of these things to have, now we get some overhead here. We're paying something for this, some extra space, having pointers and another data structure, all of these things. Or you could have the semantics where if I only have one thing here, I'm going to store that thing at a location, but if I have multiple, it points to a data structure. These are complicated implementation details, but you get the basic idea. If I just have a zero-sized data structure at all of these things in your array, at all these things, I'm still going to have a constant factor overhead. It's still going to be a linear-sized data structure as long as m is linear in n. So how do we pick a good hash function then? I already told you that any fixed hash function I give you is going to experience collisions. And if u is large, then there's the possibility that for some input, all of the things in my set go directly to the same hashed index value. So that's not great, right? Let's ignore that for a second. What's the easiest way to get down from our large space u to our smaller one? What's the easiest thing that we could do? Modulate, right? Great. This is called the division method. And what its function is, is essentially it's going to take a key. It's going to be k mod m. I'm going to take something of a larger space and I'm going to mod it so that it just wraps around. Perfectly valid thing to do. It satisfies what we're doing in a hash table. And if my kinds are completely uniformly distributed, if when I use my hash function, all of the keys here are uniformly distributed over this larger space, then actually this isn't such a bad thing. But that's imposing some kind of distribution requirements on the type of inputs that I'm allowed to use with these hash functions for it to have good performance, right? This is a little bit of extra mixing, a bit of manipulation, and it's essentially what Python does. Essentially all it does is it jumbles up that key for some fixed amount of jumbling and then mods it m and sticks it back. It's hard coded in the Python library what this hash function is. There exists some sequences of inserts into a hash table in Python which will be really bad in terms of performance because those chain links are the amount, the number of collisions that I'll get at a single hash and that's going to be large, right? But they do that for other reasons. They want a deterministic hash function. They want something that I can program again. It's going to be the same thing underneath. Sometimes Python does get it wrong. If your data that you're storing is sufficiently uncorrelated to the hash function they've chosen, which it usually is, then that could be okay. In fact, pretty good performance. This isn't so much practical class. Well, it is a practical class. But one of the things that we are, that's the emphasis of this class is making sure that we can prove that this is good in theory as well. If I don't want to, I don't want to know that sometimes this will be good. I want to know that if I make this data structure and I put some inputs on it, I want a running time that's independent on whatever inputs I decided to use, independent of those keys that we're storing. But it's impossible for me to pick a fixed hash function that will achieve this because I just told you that if you is large, if you is large, then there exists inputs that map everything to one place, right? That's a problem. There's no way to solve that. That's true if I want a deterministic hash function. I want this thing to be repeatable to do the same thing over and over again for any set of inputs. What can we do instead though? Let's weaken the notion of what constant time is to do better. Use a non-deterministic, what does non-deterministic mean? It means you don't choose a hash function upfront, choose one randomly later, right? So have the user pick whatever inputs they're going to do and then we pick a hash function randomly. They don't know which hash function we're going to pick, so it's hard for them to give you an input that's bad. So I'm going to choose a random hash function. Can I choose a hash function from the space of all hash functions? What is the space of all hash functions of this form? For every one of these values, I give a value in here. For every one of those independently random numbers between your range, how many such hash functions are there? M to this number, right? That's a lot of things. We can't do that. But what we can do is fix a family of hash functions where if I choose one from randomly, I get good performance. And so the hash function I'm going to use, and we're going to spend the rest of the time on, is what we call a universal hash function. I've tried to include, this is going to get to be a lot of variables and mathematical writing, so I've tried to write it in LaTeX screenshot where I can, so it's prettier than just what's in the slides. Okay, so it satisfies what we call a universal hash property. So universal hash function here. And this is a little bit of weird nomenclature because I'm defining this to you as the universal hash function, but actually universal is a descriptor, right? There exist many universal hash functions. This just happens to be an example of one of them. So there's this hash function. It doesn't look actually all that different. It's kind of going to do the same thing as what's happening before, but before modding by m, I'm multiplying it by a number. I'm adding a number. I'm taking it, mod another number, and then I'm getting my m. This is a little weird. And not only that, this is still a fixed hash function. I don't want that. I want to generalize this to be a family of hash functions, which are this h, ab, k for some random choice of a, b in this larger range. All right, so a lot of notation going on here. Essentially what this is saying is I have a hash family. It's parameterized by the length of my hash function and some fixed larger random prime that is bigger than you. Okay. I'm going to pick some large prime number and that's going to be fixed when I make the hash table. Then when I initiate that hash table, I'm going to choose randomly one of these things by choosing a random a and a random b from that range. So what this is doing is multiplying this key by some random number, adding some random number, modding by this prime, and then modding by the size of my thing. So it's doing a bunch of jumbling and there's some randomness involved here. I'm choosing the hash function by choosing an a, b randomly from this thing. So when I start up my program, I'm going to initiate this thing with some random a and b, not deterministically, that the user when they're using this thing doesn't know which a and b I picked. So it's really hard for them to give us a bad example, like we talked about. And this universal hash function, this universal, what am I saying, universal hash family, shall we say, is a family of functions that I'm choosing one randomly within that family is universal and universality says what's the property of universality. It means that the probability by choosing a hash function from this hash family that a certain key collides with another key is less than or equal to one over m for all for any different two keys in my universe. Right. Basically, this thing has the property that if I randomly for any two keys that I pick in my universe space, if I randomly choose a hash function, the probability that these things collide is less than one over m. And why is that good? This is in some case a measure of how well distributed these things are. I want these things to collide with one over m probability so these things don't collide very often. It's not very likely for these things to collide. Hopefully you're following me here. So we want proof that this hash family satisfies this universal property. But we can use this result to show that if we use a universal this universal hash family that the length of our change is expected to be constant length. So we're going to use this property to prove that. And how do we prove that? Well, this is where I love having my stats background because we're actually going to do probability here. I'm going to define a random variable and indicator random variable. Hopefully you remember what an indicator random variable is or an indicator in a random variable is. It's a variable that with some amount of probability is one and one minus that probability is zero. So I'm going to define this indicator random variable xij. Let's see here. I'm going to define this random variable. This indicator random variable I should say xij. It's a random variable over my choice over choice of hash functions in my hash family. And what does this mean? It means xij equals one if hash ki equals hkj if these things collide and zero otherwise. So I'm choosing randomly over this hash family if for two keys, keys i and key j, if these things collide, that's going to be one. If they don't, it's going to be zero. Then how can we write a formula for the length of a change in this model? So the size of a chain at i and my hash table is going to equal, I'm going to call that the random variable xi, that's going to equal the sum over j equals zero to u minus one of xij. So basically if I fix this location i, this is where our key goes. This is the size of the chain at h of ki. So if I look at wherever ki goes, it is hashed, I see how many things collide with it. I'm just summing over all of these things because this is one if there's a collision and zero if there's not. Does this make sense? So this is the size of the chain at the index location mapped to by ki. Okay, so here's where our probability comes in. What's the expected value of this chain length over my random choice? Okay, expected value of choosing a hash function from this universal hash family of this chain length. Let's put here. That's the expected value of the summation over j of xij. And what do I know about expectations and summations if these variables are independent from each other? Think about that. Linearity of expectation, right? Basically the expectation sum of these independent random variables is the same as the summation of their expectations. So this is just equal to the summation over j of the expectations of these individual ones. One of these j's is the same as i, right? As you're looking at these, one of these j's is the same as i. j loops over all the things from zero to u minus one. One of them is i. So when xh i is hj, what's the expected value that they collide? So I'm going to refit where does j not equal i plus one? Are people okay with this? If j and i are equal, they are definitely colliding. They're the same key, right? So we're expected to have an original key xi, but otherwise we can use this universal property that says if they're not equal and they collide, which is exactly this case, the probability that happens is one over m. And since it's an indicator random variable, the expectation is there are outcomes times their probabilities. Is their outcomes times their probabilities? So one times that probability plus zero times one minus that probability, which is just one over m, right? So now we get the summation of one over m for j not equal to i plus one. Oh, and we're storing n. I may have said u earlier. We're storing n keys, right? So now I'm looping over j, this over all of those things. How many are up there? n minus one things, right? So this should equal one plus n minus one over m. That's what universality gives us. So as long as we choose m to be larger than n, or at least linear in n, then we are expected to have our chain lengths be constant, because this thing becomes a constant if m is at least order n, right? Does this make sense? Hopefully, hopefully we're seeing this now. Last thing I'm going to leave you with today, how do we make this thing dynamic? If we're growing the number of things we're storing together, it's possible that as we grow n for a fixed m, this thing, m will stop being linear in n, right? Well then all we have to do is if we get too far, we rebuild the entire thing, the entire hash table with the new m, just like we did with the dynamic array. And you can prove, we're not going to do that here, but you can prove that you won't do that operation too often if you're resizing in the right way. And so you just rebuild completely after a certain number of operations, right? Okay. That is hashing. Next time we're going to be talking about doing a faster, faster sort. Okay. Thanks.