Okay, hello, hello. Okay, so now we have a Singleton lecture on linear programming, which is a general purpose optimization technique that you can use to solve a whole bunch of problems, including ones that we've already seen in this course. Linear programming is one of my favorite, favorite topics and techniques. Most recently, we looked at MaxFlow, which we wouldn't have had to go through all that pain. We went to derive MaxFlow algorithm if we had linear program packaging handy. And all you wanted to do was find the optimum solution.

Okay, you just could have run linear programming with an appropriate input. Of course, that is derived from the flow network and you'd get your optimal solution. We'll spend a couple minutes on that as we look at the power of linear programming in today's lecture, but it's not just MaxFlow, right? You could do, you could do shortest pass. You could do multi-commodity MaxFlow, which is more complicated than MaxFlow and a variety of other problems. So that's good news.

The bad news is that algorithms for linear programming are a heck of a lot more complicated than maximum flow. And you can imagine that that would be the case because it's a more general purpose and a more powerful technique. But the algorithm we're going to describe today and execute on an example input is a simplex algorithm, the simplex algorithm that runs in worst case exponential time. So a little bit of context, let's just dive right into example of optimization in the context of politics and see how could you formulate a particular problem as a linear program. Okay, so how do politics work? You buy elections, right?

So you don't want to spend a lot of money. You want to minimize the amount of money that's required to buy an election. And the way you buy an election is campaigning, right? You advertise. And it doesn't matter, you know, facts that are relevant. As long as you get to the right demographic with the right message, let's assume that you're going to win the election.

Okay, so that's our mathematical abstraction of campaigning and politics in 30 seconds. Okay, so how to campaign to win an election, right? And as I said, we're going to advertise, but you do have a little bit of work here. That's why you need your campaign manager. And this manager is going to estimate votes obtained per dollar spent. But the dollar is spent advertising in support of a particular case or a particular issue.

And contradictions are allowed as long as you're sending different messages to different demographics, you're okay, all right? You're assuming that people don't watch more than one channel, right? So you're a Fox guy, news guy, or you're an MSNBC guy. You don't do both, right? So we are going to get this estimate, right? We have a table and so you have your policy and you have your demographic.

We've got urban, suburban and rural. Here's our policies. We want to build roads, kind of boring. Some people are interested in roads. Gun control, very sensitive. Farm subsidies, you know, who's interested in that.

And gasoline tax, right? Kind of more, this hits your pocket. More or less everybody's interested in that. So the urban guys you want to build roads, they don't like you. So you get a minus two there. So you can't advertise and it can hurt you, right?

You can get, you'll lose votes, right? So we tell us the urban people, typically it's a situation where maybe we've got nicer cars, you don't like potholes. So you like roads if you live in suburbia, right? Rural people, they have four-wheel drive. They don't particularly care. They don't care as much.

Gun control, you can imagine urban people may like that. Urban people are like, hmm, meh. And rural people don't like that, right? You do not want to advertise gun control in a rural area. Farm subsidies, so don't want to deal with that in urban and suburban. They're like, what's a farm?

Rural people love it, right? Gasoline tax, that's obviously, yeah. Okay. Those are the numbers. I'm not going to justify every number here, but you can put in whatever numbers you want. It could have positive numbers.

It could have negative numbers, and you still want to win this election, right? Regardless of how crazy the demographics are, how crazy your electorate is, you want to win the election. So as long as you have a great campaign manager who can get you this table, it's all mathematical from here on out. So you've just got to figure out how to win the majority, right? And you could argue that, let me, this over here, all you want to do is win the election, okay? It's slightly different though, which is something that obviously is going to guarantee victory, but you want to win a majority in every demographic, okay?

And the tables may be off by a little. You want to be careful. So the last thing, of course, is in order to estimate how much money you need is the population, right? So this is our last row of our table. Majority will assume you win in the case of ties just to keep these numbers easy. So that's just divided by two.

And you want to spend the minimum amount of money, okay? So this is our optimization problem. So we can take this and we can convert it into a set of linear equations, and that's going to create our linear program, our first linear program. And this is our algebraic setup here. So we need some variables. We've got X1, X2, X3, X4 to denote the dollar spent per issue.

So we've got the four issues from the table. It's important to make sure you know what I'm talking about with respect to a particular issue. So we have our four issues. Those are our four linear program variables. And you're trying to discover the value of these variables to optimize, minimize your cost function, right? The second thing that a linear program has, and pretty much the only other thing a linear program has, are constraints.

And these constraints are also linear. It gets more complicated if you have a quadratic constraint, so we won't go there. These constraints that I'm going to write correspond to our statement that says we want a majority in each demographic. So you can imagine that because we have three demographics, you're going to have three constraints. So I've got my minimization criterion, minimize X1 plus X2 plus X3 plus X4, subject to minus 2X1 plus 8X2 plus 0X3 plus 10X4 greater than or equal to 50,000. And this represents the requirement that I want a majority in the first demographic, namely the urban demographic.

Let's go back, right? So I want at least 50,000 votes there, okay? And I need to spend the money corresponding to the values of X1 through X4 in such a way that I could get those 50,000 votes. And that represents that it's just reading off the minus 2, 8, 0, and 10 from the urban column, right? I'll show it again. Okay.

Here we go. Okay. So those numbers that you see correspond to the column, right? Because I'm talking about the urban demographic. And you can imagine the next constraint is going to correspond to the next column and the third. So that's our set of constraints.

But there's one more little issue that we have to be careful about if you're being precise. And that is that there's no notion of unadvertising, right? And so you're going to spend positive dollars. So X1 through X4 is greater than or equal to zero. So that's our first linear program. And the number of variables is small n.

And you can imagine that the number of constraints here just talking about these constraints are m constraints. And you certainly want a runtime that is polynomial in n. That's our goal here. We'll look at an algorithm. It's simplex, right? That in the worst case runs exponentially.

But n is simpler. It's very efficient in practice, right? So in our particular problem, I will just tell you that the optimum for this particular linear program with these particular numbers correspond to these numbers shown here on the slide. So you want to spend something to the order of 20,000 for... So there's a hundred, right, on the bottom. So take away two of the zeros to spend something to the order of 20,000 for the first issue, building roads, spend a bit of money for the second issue, ignoring the third corresponding to farm subsidies, and spend a bit of money for the gasoline tax issue.

And these numbers are important other than the fact that they happen to be optimum. So if you add up all these numbers, then x1 plus x2 plus x3 plus x4 is something of the order of 27,000 shown here as a fraction. So important consideration here is that these values, xi, are real numbers. That's it. It's not that they have to be integral. Clearly there were fractions here for the optimum.

I don't have a lot of them anyway. But in general, linear programming says variable values are real. Okay. So I want to go back to this claim where I said this is optimum. Now without actually describing an algorithm to you, I'm going to be able to show you, convince you that this value here corresponding to whatever it is, 3 million, 3.1 million, is in fact optimum. And this is something I could do because linear programming has this very...

This powerful notion of duality. So what is it? Let's just look at our specific example here and I will give you a very specific observation. I'm going to give you what you can think of as a certificate of optimality. I'm going to give you a certificate of optimality for that set of numbers. So is there a short certificate?

The certificate isn't going to work for other examples. It's short. It only works for this example. And consider that I compute these particular algebraic quantities where all I've done is taken these three equations and I multiply them by these constraints. And if I take these equations here, one, two, and three, they refer to the equations. These are the equations or constraints.

And so I take that and obviously if I have a bunch of equations and I multiply them out, I can certainly add them up and I get another equation at the end of it. And that's... It's all going to be linear, right? And if I do that, I get x1 plus x2 plus 140 divided by 222 times x3 plus x4. So that's what happens to the left-hand side. And on the right-hand side, you'll recognize this quantity, 5 zeros divided by 111.

That's what you get here. So now that I've done this, why have I just shown you that 3.1 million divided by 111 is in fact optimum? Look what we have on the left-hand side. The key observation here is that x1 plus x2 plus x3 plus x4 is greater than or equal to x1 plus x2 because all of these other positive quantities, remember 140 divided by 222, that's less than 1x3 plus x4, correct? So given that, I can say that this is greater than or equal to 3.1 million over 111. It's because of this observation that it's a certificate of optimality, okay?

What I'd like to do is give you a sense of how we can convert the standard form. So you can apply an algorithm that, for example, you have a program and it only requires standard form. It runs on standard form. So it's probably just one conversion here, this tricky. So I suppose I want to minimize minus 2x1 plus 3x2 and I want to convert it to standard form. All I have is a standard LP solver.

What do I do, right? What do I do if I have a solver that was maximizing but I want to minimize a quantity? We just switched the sides, right? So negative 2x1 minus 3x2 and maximize. So that's easy enough. Next one is tricky.

Trigger. Suppose xj does not have a non-negativity constraint. So it just happens to be the case that it's not dollars but some other quantity that can go negative. It might be profit or loss. So that quantity represents profit and loss. It could go negative if it's lost.

So I don't have this constraint in my original problem specification but my standard form and LP solver requires the entire vector being non-negative here. So I've got a problem. I can't use my standard solver because of this non-negativity constraint. So how do we fix that? How do I turn it into a problem that allows the standard solver to be used? So you have to do here is take xj and replace it with let's say xj prime minus xj double prime and you have xj prime greater than or equal to zero. xj double prime greater than or equal to zero.

But depending on the particular values in whatever solution you're exploiting and the final solution, you may have an actual xj value that's negative or positive. So you add an extra variable here to your linear program. And okay, so a couple more, one more real quick. Suppose I have an equality constraint corresponding to x1 plus x2 equals seven. What do I do with an equality constraint where I have x1 plus x2 equals seven? You have two steps here, right?

So you're less than or equal, you're less than or equal to, yeah, it needs another multiplier. So you end up doing something like x1 plus x2 less than or equal to seven and then you need to flip the sign. You get x1 minus x2 less than or equal to minus seven. So that's the standard form. I needed less than or equal to what we've done is increase the number of constraints by one. So that's that.

The last thing which we've done here already greater than or equal to constraint translated, I won't give you an example of this. We have this already actually translates to less than or equal to by minus one multiplied. So we have to invoke that in order to do the equality anyway, right? So you're in business. If you have a standard LP solver, you can take pretty much any optimization problem that is linear in terms of its objective function and has linear constraints. And you can transform it into linear programming if you had a nonlinear constraint.

There's lots of work that goes on in linearizing those constraints and using LP solvers reductions, right? We'll start that up right now where we'll take existing combinatorial problems for which we already knew the algorithms for. We're going to reduce them to linear programming just to give you a sense of the power of linear programming. OK. So let's say I got our favorite problem of the week, namely Maxflow. And I want to convert that to linear programming.

Maxflow is obviously a maximization problem. And we're using the same notation we've used. It's not going to look like AX and B just because I want you to recall what Maxflow is. And we're going to translate that and the values of these variables or the names of these variables, whether they're X or F, should really matter. We know how to do linear programming at this point. We know how to formulate LP.

I should say, yeah, at this point, we're assuming that we have an LP solver. So what I want to do here with the maximum flow problem is maximizing the flow value. And it's simply you grab the source, you have a variable associated with the flow from that source to every other vertex V of V. And you have to maximize that. So that was the setup for our Maxflow. I'm not changing that.

What do we think the three constraints are? OK, so I'm going to have to put up capacity constraints. That's an obvious one. Conservation constraints, all flow entering entering a node that is not the source or the sink has to leave it right in the original network. There is there a concept of negative flow? No, you'll you'll define it going in the other direction.

So we did talk about negative numbers, but you're not going to. Or sorry, but you're going to have positive quantities, especially if we look at net flow, right? And you also have in the general setting, you're going to have these skew symmetry constraints as well. So the three things we need are skew symmetry, conservation and capacity. So you you have such that F u V equals F V u for all u V belonging to V. And the last one is F u V less than or equal to C of u V for all u V belonging to cap V.

OK, notice, these are linear. They're all linear. And so you might say, well, I know better. Max flow is much more efficient than any LP solver that's out there. And you would be right if you have a max flow problem of this variety. It's difficult to imagine that you would get performance, empirical performance from running an LP solver.

But this generalization of max flow, that's a multi commodity max flow where you just don't have one commodity flowing through. You might be continually throwing in cars or trucks on a road where there's two different kinds of liquids flowing through the same pipe, whatever gas or liquid. And so when you have multiple commodities, you might have a linear but more complicated cost function as a function of the flow of each of the commodities. And they may have a certain weight associated with them, right? So there's a lot of things that could be more general. There could be more general settings corresponding to max flow.

So you can see that it's not completely clear in some cases how to transform problems to linear programming. But even in those cases, sometimes you can. So there's just a ton of different problems. A good skill to have is to be able to take a combinatorial optimization engines like linear programming or even max flow and be able to translate problems to them. It's something you'll probably do if you stick to algorithms in your careers or exploiting available algorithm packages. So the last thing I want to do here for the rest of the time is give you a sense for how an LP program is actually optimized.

How can you possibly take the standard LP formulation, which is in a general setting? You know, nothing about max flow. It's not about a specific problem. It's about a general setting. How can we solve the general setting? Because that was the theme here anyways, right?

You have this engine. We want to use this engine, but now how do we build this engine? So what we're going to do is look at a fairly simple example of the simplex algorithm. And this algorithm is listed in your reference textbooks. It's one of my favorite algorithms I use all the time in my career as an analyst, as a bio mathematician. The most important concept in simplex is yet another form of representation for simplex, right?

Which says that you can represent the LP not in standard form, but in slack form. I'm going to tell you what slack form is and then we're going to do what we're going to do is the flow of simplex algorithm flow is to convert one slack form into an equivalent. Obviously, you don't want to do something that's incorrect, but it has to be an equivalent slack form whose objective value has not decreased and has likely increased. So you're guaranteed that the objective value has not decreased. You're not guaranteed that it's increased. And then we're going to keep going till the optimal solution becomes obvious.

And you might say, how is it obvious? The reason why I talked about the short certificate of optimality, right? That's the reason it's definitely a relationship between the termination of simplex and the fact that you can now say, hey, I know I'm done here. It's kind of obvious that I can't do any better. And hopefully you'll see that by the end of this example. So that's it.

It's an iterative algorithm. It's exponential, unfortunately, because it takes m plus n, well, it takes m plus n choose n iterations in the worst case. Where n is the number of variables and m is the number of constraints. Most of the time it does a lot better, but that's the only bound that you can actually prove in the worst case. And so you're stuck with an exponential algorithm if you're using simplex worst case. We won't actually do much analysis on simplex.

It's kind of out of the scope for 381 in terms of the analysis, but the actual algorithm is certainly in the scope. OK. So what I want to do is give you some sense for what the slack form yeah, what the slack form looks like. And we'll do a couple of iterations of simplex and we'll get as far as we can. So we'll take a different example from our political example. It's similar in size.

And I want to explain to you what the slack form is and why it's interesting. So what I want to do is maximize 3x1 plus x2 plus x3 subject to the constraints that x1 plus x2 plus 3x2 is less than or equal to 30. 2x1 plus 2x2 plus 5x3 is less than or equal to 24. 4x1 plus x2 plus 2x3 is less than or equal to 36. And then the non-negativity constraints x1, x2, x3 greater than or equal to zero. OK. So that's our example problem. You're going to convert this into slack form.

And what is slack form? We're going to introduce an additional number of variables that correspond to the number of equations that we have. So we're going to introduce in this case three new variables because I have three equations. And the slack form for this problem looks like this. I'm going to have z equals 3x1 plus x2 plus x3 same as before. And then I'm going to have variables that represent these are called basic variables or slack variables.

And the original variables are called non-basic variables. So I'm going to add three basic labels x4, x5, and x6 corresponding to these three constraints. And they're going to represent slack in the sense that they're going to correspond to how much slack you have in the inequalities that you have in the original problem. So if x4 happens to be zero, then you're jammed up. You have no slack because x1 plus x2 plus 3x3 equals 30. And increasing any one of them will violate the constraint.

So that's just simply the notation of slack. It's how much room do we have? x5 is 24 minus 2x1 minus 2x2 minus 5x3. And the last one is 36 minus 4x1. This is very mechanical up to this point. And so we'll call this set of equations, you know, equation one, I guess. And what I'm going to do is I'm going to now work on a space that corresponds to x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, and x6.

So I'm going to have these solutions that now have six values associated with them, as opposed to just the three values, because I've added my three variables, the basic variables, slack variables, to my non-basic set. So the original variables are non-basic just to differentiate, right? So so far it's just set up in definitions. We can think about running through iterations of simplex. It takes about three iterations here in order to get to the point where the optimum is obvious. So you're going to convert through three slack forms.

And then finally, when you get to this fourth slack form, you'll see that you have an optimal solution. So how does that work? You're going to have the notion of a basic solution where we set all the non-basic variables to zero. So in this case, we're going to have, okay, so anyway, they were going to compute basic values of the basic variables. Okay, but now the key step, we're going to do something called pivoting. And in pivoting, you're going to swap a basic with a non-basic variable.

It's a step that requires some intelligent, but the basic step is a swap here. So one of the basic variables is going to become a non-basic variable and vice versa. And how do we select this? Initially, you can kind of do this in an arbitrary way. It gets a little more subtle as you go along. You don't want to do things in a random way, okay?

But let's just start with what pivoting actually does in a more generic setting. The basic step is select a non-basic variable. Let's call it x sub e, whose coefficient in the objective function is positive. You can always redefine things if you can't find something like that, but we're not going to go there today. And then what we're going to do is we're going to increase the value of x as much as possible. And we always have constraints, of course.

So we can do that without violating any of the constraints. And then at this point, variable x e becomes basic. So that's going to turn into the left-hand side. It's going to move over. You're going to swap the x1. You've got to rewrite these equations so the x1 becomes basic, for example, over on the left-hand side.

And the variable that we placed, it goes on the right-hand side. So you can think of it as Gaussian elimination, except with inequalities, right? There's definitely relationships there, if you recall, Gaussian elimination, if you don't, don't stress about it. So x e becomes basic. Some of the other variables become non-basic. The values of other basic variables and the objective function may change.

So we'll do one pivot step at least so you get a sense for the algebra involved, and then it becomes a little more concrete. OK? So what did I do here? We're selecting a non-basic variable. So let's just select x1, numeric order. Let's select x1.

That's the non-basic variable. And what I want to do is increase the value of x1. So I want to increase it without violating constraints. OK? Now, which of these constraints do you think is going to cause trouble? First, with respect to increasing the value of x1. x1 is now zero.

OK? We're at ground level. We have all zero things are feasible. OK? Now, as I start increasing x1, remember you have non-negativity constraints associated with each of the x4 values as well. That's what these basic variables represent.

So don't forget about the fact that these constraints are violated. Right? You need all the xis to be greater than or equal to zero. That was true for the non-basic variables. It's also true for the basic variables. So a violation of a constraint implies that one of the currently basic variables goes negative.

That's exactly equivalent to the original inequality not being satisfied. OK? So which of these constraints do you think is going to cause trouble here? If we just look at them, and we should be able to look at the three equations, you can tell me as I increase the value of x1, where am I going to hit my limit? x6, right? So that's because of the minus four. This is a big multiplier.

I've got a minus one, a minus two, a minus four. And if we just look at four, the magnitude four is bigger than two and it's bigger than one. So it's going to be that third constraint. OK? So third constraint, you can obviously compute this numerically or mechanically. It was just easier to do this example by eyeballing it, right?

The third constraint is the tightest one and it limits how much we can increase x1. So I'm going to do my second step up there, which corresponds to rewriting x1 as these other variables. I've got x1 on the left side, x6 on the right side, and now it's just merely a matter of substitution. OK? So once I've done this, I'm going to jam through and I'm going to go in and rewrite the other equations with x6 on the right hand side. And that is, I'm going to replace x1 with the eyeball equation.

And that's really a, you know, just a substitution here. So at this point, what's happened is because the third constraint representing x6 was the one that was chosen, what's happened is that x1 and x6 are going to interchange roles. x1 was non-basic, it's going to become basic. x6 was basic, it's going to become non-basic. And that's basically the essence of Simplex's algorithm. The iteration and then the convergence of all of that is, as I mentioned, going to require getting to a point where the optimality is obvious. We're not going to do any proofs corresponding to conversions for Simplex or any other specific LP techniques in this class. But I just want to give you a sense of the flow here.

So let's just go through this last thing in terms of finishing off the pivot xis. And I want to show you what the equation looks like. And if you just keep doing that at some point, you'll convert. So what happens here is you have z equals 27 plus x2 divided by 4 plus x3 divided by 2 minus 3x6 divided by 4. x1, so there's a bunch of algebra here that I'm obviously skipping over. It's simple algebra, but I'm skipping it nonetheless. And so I have x4, 21 minus 3x2 divided by 4 minus 5x3 divided by 2 plus x6 divided by 4.

And then one last thing, so that's my pivot step that I flipped x1 and x6. So now you might be thinking, what was the point? What was the point of this? Well, the point of this was that you actually increase the objective function value. And in this particular case, quite significantly while maintaining correctness. And so let me just make these observations and then we'll conclude here because then that gets us to the point where we've seen all the details of one pivot step.

And you can imagine applying it over and over to a convergence. So let's look at the original basic solution, which we call was 0, 0, 0, 30, 24, and 36. So this is simply x1 through x6. And this is the original basic solution. And it suddenly satisfies the constraints if you just put them in there. And it makes sense that that will have the objective value of 0 given the equivalence.

But you can verify that makes sense by saying you have 27, right? The original had the objective value of 0 because all the x sub 1, x2, x3 were 0. So that was an easy check in the set of equations corresponding to that first step. And if you look at what we have here, I have 36 equals 0. So the objective value here is 0. It matches what we had before.

But the basic solution for 2, I'm going to have to set the non-basic values, right? So the non-basic values are 0. So the solution is going to be 9 because 9 is non-basic. x1 is now non-basic, x2 and x3 are still basic. And then I have 21 and 6 and x6 has now become basic. So the way I get this solution is simply by plugging in zeros onto the left side, right? While maintaining correctness to an objective value of 27.

And then you do have to do two more pivots corresponding to the two other variables. I've shown this in the slide if you want to take a look. The same stuff that we went through here, substitution after selection, and the objective value is going to increase. And you might ask, how do we know that we're done? So that's the last thing here, which is increase the value pivot until it becomes obvious what the optimum is, right? And what ends up happening is that you end up with an objective function.

In this case, the objective function, mind you, this thing right here with my z, that's my objective function. And notice that it has a negative coefficient on the variable that was actually part of the first pivot. So x1 and x6 were part of the first pivot and that got a negative coefficient. So what ends up happening here is you end up getting something like 30 minus something, minus something, minus something, where you have xi values in the something spots. And when you set those to be zero, that's the best you can do because these are all negative quantities, right? So I'll just leave you with that.

So we've got pivoting in here, sub through three times. Once you get that objective function, the optimum value is 30. If this feels confusing for you, I have another example that I've put slides up for, where I go through graphing the constraints and kind of seeing that in more of like a graphing mindset. So do take a look at that. Send me any questions you have. Of course, I love Simplex method and Simplex algorithm and looking at kind of like extreme points when that corresponds to extreme points in our graph regions and how we can optimize these linear programs.

Anyway, super, super cool. And I will see you next time.