Okay, we're going to start recording. And we'll see if that helps with your dictation is going on. Okay team so let's get started. We're going to talk about about graph theory today. So today we're going to have our first electron graphs which I think will be somewhat a review for many of you guys and if it's not as cool to because we'll start from the beginning and kind of build up all the notations that we need to understand and process graphs and hopefully by the end of lecture have some style of algorithm for computing the shortest path from one vertex to all the other ones. So in case we forgot a little bit of terminology here. A graph some people would call this a network. Sometimes that term is overloaded with a few different kind of variations on the theme is a is a collection of two things. That's that's what this previous one is talking about. There's a set of vertices and a set of edges. And the edges are a subset of the cross B. Okay, now this fancy notation for this. This is just fancy notation for something really, really simple because what is this telling us. This is telling me that an edge like in the picture that we see on the screen here is just something that connects to vertices together. So let's just look at the two things. So let's just look at the two things that connect to vertices together. So if I think of there being a pair of vertices like the from and the two, then that is a subset of the cross product of V and itself. So hopefully that notation makes some sense. This is just a fancy notation for edges are pairs of vertices. But of course inside of that notation there are two special cases that we care about in this class. So one is when you have a directed graph. And one is when you have an undirected graph. So in an undirected graph, there's no such thing as an edge from W to V being distinct from an edge from V to W. Those, those are the same thing. They're undirected. It's just a notion of connectivity. Whereas in a directed graph, now we're going to use that parenthetical notation to say that the edge from W to B is different than the edge from V to V to W. So the idea that that may be a partly directed paragraph not, a partly directed paragraph. So the idea that the series of parentheses and swiggly lines is that those swiggly lines are unordered. This is a set of things. And of course in an undirected edge, there's no such thing as an edge from W to V being distinct from an edge from V to W. Those, those are the same thing, they're undirected. use that parenthetical notation to say that the edge from u to v is different than the edge from v to u. Notation here is going to make a big difference. So for example, in the graph on the right, can I get from the upper right vertex to the lower left vertex following edges in this graph? No, right? I'd have to go against the stream of the water. But that's not allowable in the directed graph case. Of course, I'm already anticipating the notion of a path which we haven't really defined yet. But I think intuitively, that's the big difference between directed and undirected graphs. Hopefully that distinction makes sense to all of you. And I haven't managed to lose you in three minutes or less. So I figured we define what a graph is first before telling you what the implications are. In any event, I think it's really not a big stretch of the imagination to say graphs are literally everywhere. They're just in our everyday lives. And anytime we come up with a network of stuff connected together, implicitly, the right abstraction, often in the back of our heads, is to think about a graph. So some simple examples that I think would all come to mind for us would be computer networks. So the nodes or the vertices of your graph in that case maybe are the computers. And then the edges are roughly the cables connecting them together in my very coarse understanding of how networks work. Or maybe a social network. The nodes are people in your social network. And the edges are friendship relationships. In fact, probably we could have both directed and undirected versions of that particular network. In road networks, maybe I'm working for Google. And I want to tell you the shortest path between your house and BYU Idaho campus. Of course, in order to do that, and essentially behind the scenes, we're solving some version of computing the shortest path between two vertices in a graph. So that's a, anyway, a road network is a very special type of graph, I guess. And if you take an advanced course, then maybe we can learn a little bit more about that graph. That we can do some of that. But we'll talk about more advanced courses. Maybe we'll hit that at the end of this class. But the basic algorithms that we'll talk about on 381 are certainly relevant in that case, and are really the building blocks for what goes on in the tools that are used every day on your phone when you open Google Maps or Waze or whatever. And of course, there's many others. So for instance, an example that's maybe a little bit more subtle would be the set of estates and transitions of a discrete thing. So think about a Rubik's Cube. I could make a graph where the node is every configuration of my Rubik's Cube, like every rotation, every twist. And the edges are like I can get from this configuration to that one, making one symbol transition, like one flip. And of course, there's many other places. So we're going to make a couple assumptions both on problems that we want to solve as well as in the graphs that we care about. So in particular, one simplifying assumption, which really doesn't affect many of the algorithms we'll talk about here, but it is worth noting explicitly, is that we'll most be thinking about a particular type of graph called a simple graph. And in fact, often, depending on how you define your graph, you kind of accidentally make your graph simple, even if you don't intend to. So for example, we wrote that our edges were a subset of v cross v, which maybe means that I can't have multiple edges that sort of traverse the same pair of vertices. So let's see an example of a graph that is not simple then. And I haven't actually defined a simple graph, I guess, is a graph that has no self loops. So it can't go from a vertex to itself. And every edge is distinct. So let's make the most non-simple graph we can think of. Let's say we've got our two vertices shown here. So there's a graph, two vertices and one edge. This is simple. And if I wanted to be annoying and make it not simple, maybe I take that edge, I duplicate it a few times just for fun. That would violate our second assumption. And then to make it even worse, I can violate the first one by adding an edge that goes from that vertex to itself on the right side. That is not simple. I don't know what we would call this actually, maybe general graph. I guess it's complicated because it's not simple. But in any event, in this class, we we're not going to worry about this particular circumstance. And of course, in many applications of graph theory, that's a totally reasonable assumption to make. So from now on, whenever we think about a graph in the back of our head, we're going to think of our graph as being simple. There's one nice property that a simple graph has, which I've written here, which is that the edges are big O of v squared. And in fact, let's expand that formula just a tiny bit. So there are sort of two cases here. One is when my graph is undirected. The other is when my graph is directed. So if I have a directed graph, well, let's think about how many edges we could possibly have. So an edge is a pair of a from vertex and a to vertex. And I can never repeat it twice. That's sort of like the second assumption. So in particular, what do we know then? We know that mod E, or rather the number of edges in our graph, is upper bounded by what? Well, I can take any pair of vertices, but I have to be a little bit careful because my graph is directed. So from an and to matter here. So this is v choose 2. So v choose 2 here, shown here, is saying that I can take any unique pair of vertices, but I have to put a factor of 2 in front of it to account for the fact that the source and the target can be a flip back and forth. And of course, if I want to do the undirected, I wouldn't then have to worry about that. We'll get E here is less than or equal to just mod v choose 2. So this is a panthe way of saying that every edge consists of two vertices, and my edges are unique. And one thing, if you just write down the formula for our binomial coefficient, we'll see that both of these things are at worst mod v squared here. And that should make perfect sense because, of course, an edge is a pair of vertices. You kind of expect there to be a square. So the 2 for the director case comes from the fact that an edge from v to w is different for the director case. It's different than an edge from w to v. So remember that the binomial coefficient here is just counting the number of ways that I can choose two things from a set of size v, but it doesn't care about ordering. So why is this going to matter? Well, these sort of bounds, I mean, they may seem a little bit obvious to you, but we're going to write down graph algorithms. And now when we analyze the runtime and the space they take, we now sort of have two different numbers that we can think about, the number of vertices and the number of edges. And so for instance, if I wrote down an algorithm whose runtime is proportionate to the number of edges, maybe then generically, I could also think of the algorithm as having a runtime that looks like the number of vertices squared unless we put some additional assumptions on the graph, of course. And so there's some connection between all of those different constants. And it's useful to kind of keep that in the back of our head. Sometimes you'll see a bunch of different expressions that are really encoding roughly the same relationship just in a different language. And so of course, that also means we can be more precise. So sometimes a graph is what we would call a sparse. And because of that, an algorithm that scales like the number of edges might actually be much preferable, much more preferred, to an algorithm that scales like the number of vertices squared because in practice, often there are fewer edges than every single possible pair. And so that's the sort of reason why we're thinking about these numbers. OK? OK, so if we continue talking about definitions, some other ones that we should think about involve topology, or the connectivity of our graphs, and in particular, thinking about neighbors. So in general, we can think about pairs of vertices as being neighbors of one another if there's an edge between them. We have to be a little bit careful because, of course, when we have a directed edge, we have to be careful who's on the sort of giving and receiving end of this neighbor relationship. So if we draw a really simple graph, we have vertex 0, vertex 1, vertex 2, and maybe you have an edge here going up, one edge going down, and then let's add a cycle there between 1 and 2. So now we can define a lot of different notions of neighbors, like the outgoing neighbor set, the incoming neighbor set. And the basic idea here is that we want to keep track of edges going from a vertex and edges pointing into one. So for instance, the outgoing neighbor set, which we're going to notate as ADJ plus here, what is the outgoing neighbor set of node 0 here? Well, if we take a look, notice that there's one edge going out of node 0, and it points to node 2. So of course, this is a set with which just contains one other node. And similarly, the incoming neighbor set of node 0 will notice that there's one incoming neighbor from vertex 1. So that is a set like that as well. Now, of course, in an undirected graph, the sort of distinction between these two things doesn't matter. So if you look at our final bullet point here on the slide, often in the undirected case, we just drop that plus or minus script because it sort of doesn't matter. In any event, there's one additional piece of terminology that matters quite a bit, which is degree. And this is nothing more than just counting the size of this set. So this degree, I guess I kind of overlapped those there, but I'm not sure what the number is. So anyway, so our degree is the number of edges that point out of a vertex. And the in degree is the number of edges that point in. So notice in this case, both of those numbers are 1. So let's see here in this case. So let's see in an example of where they're not. So let's, oh, not here yet. OK. So node 1, notice there's two edges coming out. OK. Sorry, I just want to make sure we're looking at the same. I have so many screens over here. OK. So the out degree of node 1 is 2. There's one edge that points in, so the in degree is 1. OK. So often, why are we going to do this? Well, we're going to get a lot of graph algorithms that have a for loop over the neighbors of a given vertex. And then this degree number is just going to come into play. It's worth bounding these things just a tiny bit sometimes, right? So in particular, let's talk about this. Let's take a look at all the possible nodes inside my graph and sum up their degrees, right? So what do we know? And in any undirected graph, every edge is adjacent to two vertices. We already said this. We know this. So if we think about how we account for degree, what do we know? Well, we know that an edge sort of contributes to the degree of two different vertices. So if I have a graph with two vertices and one edge that is undirected, notice that the number of edges here is 1. What is the sum of degree? Well, it's 1. Let's go back. It is 1 plus 1 equals 2, right? Yeah, so there are two here if my graph is undirected. And E, if my graph is directed, if what I'm counting is just the outgoing degree. OK, I think I managed to botch that sentence. Let's try this again. So if I'm counting just the number of degrees pointing out of every vertex and I count that over all the possible vertices, then there's just two cases. One is directed and one is undirected. So in the undirected case, you get a 2 there because essentially every edge is simultaneously ingoing and outgoing. Whereas you get a 1 as the coefficient in the directed case. OK, hopefully. OK, sorry that I botched that for a second. Hopefully that made more sense. OK, so that's going to be a useful bound for us later on. Now, when we think about graphs, of course, we just spent the last couple of lectures thinking about data structures. We should think about how to store a graph on a computer. And there's many different options. In fact, really one thing that you can do is sort a pair, just like we talked about sets. Many different ways to sort sets. And one way to think about it was, depending on how we're going to interact with that set, we might choose one data structure or another to sort, to optimize the types of interactions we're going to have with that set and make them as fast as possible. And this is exactly the same story for a graph. So for instance, the world's dumbest representation of a graph would just be to be a long list of edges. So for example, for this graph here that we saw earlier, maybe I have 1, 0, that's an edge. Then we have 0, 2, that's another edge. And then 1, 2, and then 2, 1. There's a big list of edges. It's really a set. I don't care about the order. So let's say that I have a graph algorithm. I'm going to have to do something like check whether there exists an edge from V to W a bunch of times. And how long is that going to take in this data structure? Well, if I just have a hot mess disorganized list of edges and I want to know does there exist an edge from V to W, all I can do is write a for loop that just goes along this and says, like this edge I'm looking for. Is this the edge I'm looking for? No. Is that the edge I'm looking for? No. So every single time I want to find an edge, it's going to take me proportional time to the number of edges in my graph, which could potentially be up to V squared. So this is not such a great representation of a graph. So if we're thinking back to our data structure, we may say, OK, so an edge list is probably not the way to go, right? Although notice that the way we notated what a graph kind of looks like or we notated what a graph kind of looks like an edge list, right? But in any event, the more common thing to do is source something like an adjacency list. So the basic idea of an adjacency list is that what I'm going to store is a set that maps a vertex U to everything adjacent to U. So in other words, I'm just going to keep track of all the outgoing edges from every vertex. And now I have to decide how am I going to store this object. And oftentimes, we're going to have answers. We're going to have answer queries. Like, does there exist an edge from V to W? So how could I do that? Well, first, I would look up V and I get back sort of a list or a set of all the things that are adjacent to V. And then I have to query that thing. And I want it to be pretty fast. So maybe what I do is store that set of adjacent stuff as something like a direct access array or a hash table to make that look up fast. So for example, how long would it take me to check if an edge existed in my graph? Well, what would I do? I would first pull out the object. We'd look inside there. So if I stored that as a hash table, then the expected time I would have order one lookup. Because this is order one. And then you would have another order one lookup. So we went from V squared to one with a simple trick. Now, if I wanted to be totally extreme about it, as just a third example of representation, which actually in some sense you could think of like an adjacency list, we need an adjacency matrix where now I just keep a giant V by V array of like, does this exist? Does that edge exist? So now it's really, really easy to check if an edge exists. But now let's say I make a graph algorithm that's going to have a for loop over all the neighbors of some vertex. So here, if I wanted to loop over all the neighbors of U, I could do that in time proportional to the number of neighbors of U. But if I just have a big adjacency matrix, just a bunch of binary values, like for every pair of vertices are these vertices adjacent, yay or nay. If I want to iterate over all my neighbors, now I have to iterate over all the vertices and check is that number one and then do something. So actually, that can occur some additional time and additional space. Hopefully that makes sense. So in any event, that's a sort of lazy man's graph representation. I use it a lot when I'm coding because adjacency matrices are easy to work with. But it does incur a lot of additional space. And it's not always the most efficient thing, even if you have the space, because iterating over neighbors, it can actually take quite a bit of time. OK, so the real point of our lecture today is to start introducing the problem that we all worry about on graphs, which is computing paths, and in particular, shortest paths. So the first thing we should do is, of course, define what a path is on a graph. So we're going to talk about our graph like a road network. Let's think of maybe every node here as an intersection. Let's say I want to find maybe a question one would be, does there exist a way to get from vertex one to vertex three? And then a better question to ask would be, does there exist a short way to get from vertex one to vertex three? Then of course, the first thing I have to do is define what I'm looking for, which is a path. So a path is nothing more than a sequence of vertices in a graph where every pair of adjacent vertices in that sequence is an edge. I think this all aligns with our intuition of what a path is in a graph. So for instance, here, a path equals v1, v2, v3. So notice that there's an edge from v1 to v2 and also an edge from v2 to v3. So it satisfies the assumptions set forth in our definition. What would not be a path in our graph would be v1, v3, because there's no edge there. So if we talk about paths, then there's a very natural notion, which is the length. Length, I guess you could think of, like the number of vertices in your path minus one or the number of edges that your path traverses. Those are the same thing. So for instance, the length of the path p here is 2. Hopefully you see that. A very common coding bug that I encounter a lot is adding 1 to that number by accident. Because of course, there's one more vertex in your path than there are edges. OK, so there are many different. There could be potentially more than one path between any pair of vertices. So let's say I have an undirected graph. Pretend that the arrows aren't showing it. OK, an undirected graph. And it looks like the following. So it's just a square. Let's add a diagonal. So here are some nodes. And then perfectly valid path from the lower left to the upper right would be to go one over, one up. But of course, there's a more efficient way to get from the lower left to the upper right, which is to go across our diagonal. And so when we talk about the shortest path, it's nothing more than the length of the path that has the fewest number of edges or vertices between any pair of vertices in my graph. OK, so this is what we're after. It's computing the shortest path between vertices in a graph. And this is the thing that we'll be talking about quite a bit in this course. There's sort of many variations on that theme when we talk about our shortest path or even just existence of a path. So here are three sort of model problems that we might solve on a graph. So the first one, which in this course we're calling single pair reachability, would be the idea that I take two vertices, S and T, on my graph, G. And I ask you, does there exist a path between S and T? So what would be the sort of extreme example where this problem may not always give back the answer? Yes, we would not give back the answer. So somehow in our head, I think we think of all graphs as being connected, but a perfectly valid graph, the way we've defined it would be like 10 vertices and no edges. This function would be very easy to code if that were the only graph you ever cared about. But any event, the existence of a path is already a query that takes a little bit of algorithmic thinking. We haven't figured out how to do that yet. Another problem we can solve would be the shortest path. Given a graph and two vertices, we might say, well, how far apart are these vertices of my graph if I want to use the shortest possible distance from one to the other? Notice that I can use the second problem to solve the first one, because what's the length of the shortest path between two vertices that don't have a path between them? Right, like shrug, I don't know. Infinity, right? Shrug, that's actually a totally valid answer here. So how could I implement the reachability code? Well, I could call my shortest path code and it gives me infinity, then I return no, it's not reachable, and if it gives me not infinity, I return yes. So remember that a key idea in an algorithms class is the idea of reduction, that I can use one function to solve another. So in this case, if we can solve a shortest path, then we can certainly solve the reachability problem by calling that piece of code. And then finally, we could talk about single source shortest path. So notice now that there's only one input node here, S. So what this problem is saying is, give me the length of the shortest path from S to every other single other vertex in my graph. Hopefully that makes sense. Like maybe I return a big array with all the information every single shortest distance. So can we solve single pair shortest path using single source shortest path? The answer is yes, absolutely. I could take S in my single pair shortest path problem, compute the shortest path from S to literally everything else, and then throw away all that information except the shortest path to T, and now we're good. Now I haven't justified that this is the fastest possible way to solve that second problem, but at least it does show that if I can solve problem three, I can also solve problem two. If I can solve problem two, I can also solve problem one. Each problem here is at least as hard as every problem before it. So in today's lecture, what we're going to do is, we're just gonna worry about problem three. In other words, these things are sort of listed in increasing order of their difficulty. So in order to think about the single source shortest path problem, we're gonna make one additional construction, and this idea is called the shortest path tree. So we're gonna look at a graph. We're using letters here instead of numbers to refer to nodes from now on, because I don't wanna confuse the length of the shortest path with the index of my node. So we have A, B, C, D, E, F. Here's a graph, again, undirected, because I like to think about undirected graphs. Let's say I want to compute the shortest path from A to everything else, or the length, rather. So first of all, even without talking about an algorithm, I think it's pretty easy to guess what it is. So clearly the shortest path from A to A has length zero. The shortest path from A to B is one, from A to C is two, and now it gets complicated, right, it branched. So the next shortest path is length three and then four. Here we go. So does everyone, hopefully you're agreeing that the numbers I've displayed here are the length of the shortest path from A to everything else. But what have I not done? I haven't told you how to actually compute the path. I've just given you the length of the path. So I might want a piece of code that in addition to doing single source shortest path length, it also gives me single source shortest path. These are tongue twisters. So initially, when I think about this, I might think about, well, how do I even write down a data structure that can store all of those paths? Well, every path could have, like, well, every path could have, like, V vertices in it, right? It could be that for whatever reason, there's a lot of branching going on in my graph, and all the paths are super long. Actually, I guess I have to think about whether branching would make them longer or shorter. I could have a really boring data structure that for just every single vertex keeps track of the shortest path from A to that vertex. How big would that data structure be? Well, if the only bound I have on the length of a path is that it certainly at most takes, it at most takes all the vertices in my graph, then any one path will take V space. So that would be V squared space, total. That wouldn't be so good, right? Because somehow I have an amount of information on my graph currently that's linear, it's just the length of the path. If I want to actually reconstruct that path initially, sort of feels like I need way more space to do that. The answer is actually that we don't, that we're only going to need linear space, and the idea for that is to store an object called the shortest path tree. We're going to define an object called the shortest path tree, and the basic trick here is to say, well, how did I get from A to C? Well, there's always a vertex, which is its predecessor on the shortest path. And the shortest path have this really beautiful property, which is that the shortest path from A to C, if I truncate it, right? So it goes A to B to C. Then the truncated one is also the shortest path to that previous vertex. So let's think about it a little bit, because that sentence was, as usually poorly phrased by me. Let's say that I have the shortest path from A to D, which is very clearly A, B, C, D, as we've shown here. I think we can all agree, right? And now I take like a sublist. I just look from A to C. Is there ever a circumstance when this is not the shortest path or the shortest, yeah, or a shortest path from A to C? No, right? Because if there existed a shorter path from A to C, I could splice it in here and find the shortest path from A to D. Do you see that? So based on that reasoning, rather than string like this giant set of shortest paths, you sort of actually applying in some senses, recursive suggestion, instead I can just think of the one vertex that's before me in my shortest path. I'm gonna trace backwards. So let's take a look at our graph here. Essentially the object I'm trying to keep track of is like a predecessor, right? So what is the predecessor of F on the shortest path? It's actually either D or E. It doesn't matter. Maybe the let's go predecessor is E just for fun, right? What is the predecessor of E? Well, clearly the previous vertex on the graph or on our shortest path is C. Similarly for D, now we have B and A and a bunch of arrows. Now we are pointing this way. So for every vertex, I'm just going to start an arrow pointing towards the previous vertex on the shortest path. I'm not gonna store the whole shortest path just the very last edge. So first of all, how much storage does this take? How much storage would this take? It takes B space, right? Hopefully you can see that or the size of the vertices space because every vertex just has store one thing which is the previous vertex on the shortest path. Now what does my algorithm for tracing shortest path look like is really simple. I just start walking along the edges all the way until I get back to A. Now this object is called the shortest path tree. And it's really simple. I'm just walking back to like it to A. Notice I snuck one additional word which is tree. And why is that? Can I ever have a cycle in this graph? It wouldn't really make sense, right? These are shortest paths. You should be able to kind of follow the gradient back to the original vertex. Okay, so in other words, let's add to our graph one thing. We'll call it P of V, which is the previous vertex on the shortest path from my source point to my vertex V. And what I think I've tried to argue to you guys today is that if you have this information, that's actually enough to reconstruct the shortest path. I just keep taking P of V and then P of P of V and then P of P of P of V and so on, which sounds more complicated than it is until I trace back to my original vertex. And this object conceptually is called the shortest path tree. Okay, so how do I actually compute my shortest path? And the basic thing we're going to do is sort of build on this tree analogy here. We're going to define one more object and that's the idea of a level set. And so this is a whole set of things, L sub K. And these are all the vertices that are distance K away from my source. So for instance, if my source is, if my source vertex in this example is the vertex all the way on the left, then L sub zero obviously contains just that vertex, right? L sub one is the next, L sub two is the third, but now L sub three is a set of three vertices because those are the things that are distance three away from the source. That's, I've labeled them in pink here. So essentially, if I wanted to compute the length of the shortest path from all the way on the left to the other vertices, one way to do that would be to compute all these level sets and then just sort of check which level set I'm in, right? So we're going to introduce an algorithm called breadth first search, which does roughly that. So breadth first search, the way we'll introduce it today is going to be an algorithm for computing all those level sets L sub I. And then from that, we can construct the length and even the shape of the shortest path. Okay, so here's what our algorithm is going to do. So first of all, one thing I can think we all agree on is that level set zero, it contains one note. What should that note be? It should be the source because that's the only thing that's distance zero away from the source is the source node itself. Okay, so, and then in addition to that, we can initialize the distance from the source to itself. So what's the difference from the source to itself? We know this, nothing. Maybe initially we don't really know anything about the array P, so we just make it empty because P of the source, it somehow doesn't matter because I've only made it back to the source. I'm done, because once I made it back to the source, I'm done computing the shortest path. So we're going to write an algorithm that computes all the level sets and fills in our array P and fills in the distance all in one big shot here. We're going to call it breadth-first search. So we can use the notation here and notice that there's basically an induction going on, which is I'm going to compute level set one from level set zero, level set two from level set one and so on until I fill in all of my level sets. So I'm going to use a while loop which I know is super slightly not cool, but that's okay. So we would initialize a number i to be one, that would be our counter. And I'm going to say, while the previous level set is not empty, meaning that there's potentially, there's a path that goes through the previous level set into the next because as soon as one of my level set is empty, notice that like L of L i for even bigger i are also going to be empty. There's never a case when there's something not distance i but then distance i plus five, right? If that makes sense. So what am I going to do? Well, let's think back to our graph. So now I know that the first point, the leftmost value is distance zero away. That's what we started with. So now I'm going to look at all the neighbors of this vertex and I'm going to use the same method and I'm going to make them distance one away. And similarly our next distance two and eventually I'm going to get in trouble because maybe, what's a good example? I didn't try to draw anything, but I can run into trouble if I don't want to add a vertex twice to two different level sets. Once I put it in L sub i, then I don't want to put it in L sub i plus five because I already know that it's distance i away. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to iterate over all the vertices in my previous level set. And now I'm going to look at every vertex that is adjacent to you because what do we know? We know that if I can get to u in i minus one steps, how many steps should it take me to get to any neighbor of you? i steps, right? Because I can go through the path which is the length of i minus one. I'm going to add one additional edge and then I'll get to that new guy. So what can I do? I can iterate over all of v, which is in the adjacent set of u, but I have to be a little bit careful because what if I have an edge backwards, right? So in other words, I'm only going to look at the adjacent vertices that I haven't visited yet in my level set computational algorithm. And all I have to do is update my arrays, right? So in particular, I'm going to add vertex v to level set i because I haven't seen v yet. I'm going to set the distance from s to v equal to i because I'm currently filling in my level set i. And then finally, what is p of v? What is the previous vertex to v in my shortest path from my source? It's you, right? Because that's the guy in the previous level set that I'm building my path from, right? So I'm going to set that to be you. And then also, I guess we have to increment i. So what does this algorithm do? It's just building one level set at a time. And if we go back to our picture, it starts by initializing L0 to just be the source for text. Then it looks at all the edges coming out of that. In that case, just one. It makes that length one and so on. And so this is just incrementally building up all of our level sets, right? And the final thing that we should check is what is the runtime of this algorithm? Remember in 381, remember that in 381, how much time does it take to allocate memory? It takes the amount of time proportional to the amount of memory that I allocate. So already, we've incurred v time because our shortest path array takes v space. But in addition to that, we have this kind of funny for loop where for every node, I have to visit all of its neighbors. But first of all, do I ever see a node twice here? No, right? No, because I'm going in order of distance. And the second that I've seen a node in one level set, it can't be in another. That's our basic construction here. Conveniently for you guys, you already proved exactly the formula that we need. So if we take a look, this is exactly the scenario in now. Because what do we do? We iterate it over all the nodes in our graph. And then we iterate it all the neighbors of those nodes. And that's the basic computational time in our algorithm. So that for loop or that while loop, I guess rather, in my code, is incurring time proportional to the number of edges. So what's the total runtime for the breadth first search then? Well, we need to construct that. Right, so just at step 0, we've incurred, let's go back here, just at step 0, we've incurred v time. And then we have to iterate over something that takes up to at most the number of edges. So overall, our algorithm is going to take big O mod v plus mod e time. Now notice that this is, you might view this as kind of redundant. By the way, I have a little bit of a quibble with this. But in this class, we're going to call this a linear time algorithm, because it's linear in the space that you're using to store your graph. But I think it's slightly fishy personally, because the scale could scale quadratically in v. But we don't need to go there. In any event, why do we need both of these terms here? Well, notice that if I had no edges in my graph, now that term is going to dominate. One of our terms is going to dominate v. But as I add edges to my graph, this thing could go up to v squared. So this is somehow a more informative expression than just saying, well, at worst time, this is v squared. Does that make sense? It's a slightly better formula to have. OK, so with that, we have an algorithm for computing our shortest paths. And I will see you guys next time.