Okay. Okay. Good morning. Today we're going to talk about flow network. Okay. So there's a lot of setup associated with flow.

It's an optimization problem. And so I'm going to spend some time setting up network flows, describing the max flow problem. This will be a fairly involved. Lecture. We're going to be talking about cuts in a network residual networks. And we'll more or less end the lecture with a statement, though not approved.

We'll save that. Of the max flow min cut theorem, which is really an iconic theorem in the literature. And we're going to talk about the max flow. And we're going to talk about the max flow. And we'll take the max flow min cut theorem, which is really an iconic theorem in the literature. And, and suddenly the crucial theorem for flow networks, right?

We'll, we'll take the max flow min cut theorem and use that to get the first ever max flow algorithm, which was due to Ford Fulkerson. And that should be pretty much hopefully at the end of today's lecture. Next time we'll talk about possibly the proof of max flow min cut. Talk about some issues with Ford Fulkerson and then use max flow as a hammer to solve some interesting problems in bipartite matching, baseball playoff elimination and things like that. So just like shortest pass can be used, not just to compute the shortest distance from point A to point B. You can imagine the other problems, for example, scheduling problems, time problems could be solved using dystra.

And you've probably seen examples of that max flow is another algorithmic hammer that's being used to solve a wide variety of problems. We only touch on that aspect today, but we'll spend some time next time talking about that. So let's get started then. Oh, let's fix this. Okay, here we go. Okay, so we're going to start by defining what a flow network is.

And at some level it's really simple. I mean, it's a graph, right? A graph is going to have vertices and edges. We're going to, we are, we're going to look only at directive graphs and we're going to have a couple of constraints associated with these directed graphs that are going to make the algorithms and the proofs and the notation a lot simpler. And the key thing with flow networks, I mean, just like you have a source and a destination for shortest path in a flow network as well, you're going to have a source and you're going to have a sink. So we're going to have distinguished vertices to distinguish vertices.

And we're going to call them the source S and the sink T. And the basic idea here and just to sort of set things up, you know, set things up right, right in the front end is that there's going to be some flow coming out of S. And it's going to have to obey some constraints associated with the capacities of the edges in order to make its way to T. Along the way, that is flow. And if you think of it as water or cars on a highway or whatever, it's a rate, right, you're not going to allow accumulation in the intermediate nodes. You're going to have a law of conservation associated with this commodity that's flowing, you know, if it's water flowing cars driving people funneling on sidewalks.

And that essentially comes down to for any vertex other than S or T, everything entering the vertex has to leave the vertex. So that's like Kirchoff's current law, for example. So there's a lot of analogies here with respect to real life or electricity in this case, right. So we're going to have directed edges, you and V. So you have an edge from you to V. It's going to belong to E, obviously, right.

And that's the reason the edge is in the network. And this edge is going to have a non negative each edge is going to have a non negative capacity C, UV, right. And if per per chance, there's no edge from let's say S one to S two, these are different vertices from the source or the sink just as an example, so if you assume that it's between A and B, and then we can assume the capacity is zero. So if UV does not belong to E, then assume that C, UV is zero. So there's no way of getting from you to be this, this rate, there, there's no road that gets you from you to be okay. So let's take an example of flow network we'll talk a bit about what the flow is and what the max flow is in an example driven algorithm design.

So we've got a source S here, and we've got a sink T and then we've got a bunch of nodes in the middle. So this is not like it's an acyclic graph you're allowed to have cycles in this graph, but we will have a couple of constraints that are associated with this graph that I'll get to in just a moment. So first that's what we've got we've got GVE directed graph it can't can have cycles in it. And numbers shown are the capacities associated with each edge. So those are just the capacity shown here. Those are CUV.

And I said that if UV does not belong to Eve then you're going to assume that CUV is zero right so so that's essentially the setup, except for the fact that we've just talked about capacities and this is sort of the bandwidth if you will. So this is the amount of traffic that can go through this road. And now we have to talk about the specific case where we're actually going to shove things through the network right so typically we're going to have two numbers associated with each edge one of them is going to be the capacity, and the other one is going to be the flow that goes through that edge. And as you can imagine, we're going to have this the constraint that says that the flow can never exceed the capacity. So that's the local constraint associated with each edge okay that doesn't mean that there aren't variations possible with respect to the overall flow of the network things can change. You obey edge capacities, and there could be different flow coming out of us and going into T, etc right.

And so, so there is going to be an optimization here associated with the exact numbers that all obey these edge constraints. So these edge capacity constraints okay. So let's take a real simple example here. Okay. So the first number here is flow the second number is capacity we want to make sure that our flow makes sense. I've talked about it's okay to have a flow from the source it's it's the mountain spewing water or the source of the river.

But along the way you you really can't have accumulation okay because when you think of it as a rate. Maybe you have a little bit of accumulation allowed but over a huge period of time you can't have infinite accumulation. So that's where the conservation law kicks in which says anything that goes into a node that is not marked s or T has to leave the note okay. One other thing to look at which is interesting is that you could have flows that are essentially cyclic you could have commodities that are flowing in a little cycle okay. So there's interesting things happening here with respect to the conservation laws and having to obey them. In general you can imagine that we're interested in simply maximizing the flow from the source and getting as much flow out of the source as possible pushing it to the sink okay.

Now the flow here into T as you can see is two plus one which is three okay. Can you take this particular flow network and increase the flow. It's easy to decrease the flow right you can make everything zero that would be valid, but can you increase the flow do you think that this flow network allows for a larger flow than three, given that the capacities of those edges are fixed and I'm not going to change them. I'll just take that for a moment. You can actually decrease the flow and particular edges, and that's going to help you increase the overflow, the overall flow right, and that's why this problem is challenging that's why we need so much of setup. Okay.

So one thing that I could do is, I can essentially say I'm going to take the flow leaving in the upwards direction out of you. Okay, so find you. I'm going to go to the upwards edge. Let's make it zero okay. So when I do that essentially what I have is, I get to push more flow out of you right so I get to push more flow, then I can go towards the right from you. And I can turn that last flow before the T note into a two right.

So am I done there though. No, we've got a little bug which says I've got to coming out of my, my top line now but I made the upper segment leaving you zero. So I have to push something more but hey we're lucky, because we've got our source right here right, which is giving me as much as I want correct so I can just take that. I'm just make that a two right. And then we get a flow of four. Okay.

So here's those new numbers. So the max flow that we're trying to get get at is going to start with the current flow, and we're going to improve the current flow constantly, but that doesn't mean that the edges are going to look monotonic in terms of the flows on a particular edge in relation to the capacity you'll never exceed the capacity. But as you saw in this little example already we increased from three to four by taking that edge that was vertical from you right, which which says zero colon three here, and, and that was one, and we shrink the flow on it. And so how are we going to discover these passes, especially we if we have like a 5000 node network, 10,000 edges right. And so that's essentially what we have to do for the rest of this lecture okay so we've done flow networks I kind of define what the max flow problem is given a flow network G find the flow with maximum value on G right and for this the max flow is for. That's another thing we haven't done, which is important for us to do which is, we have to show that the four in this case is the max flow right now.

Of course I've given that away and so I'm not going to ask you. You know if you can push this over like to five for example, but you might think that five is a possibility simply because the capacities of the edges that are coming out of the source are three plus two, which is five right. It's certainly possible that you could push at least if you only look at those two edges, that you could push five units from the source, but in this case, for example, if you obey the laws of conservation you cannot obey those laws and get five units from the source to the sink, but we have to prove that we, and we have an algorithm that says this is the best that you could possibly do. And the algorithm terminates when that happens, and that's our four or forward focus and algorithm right. So let's talk about flow network assumptions okay. One of the things that's a little bit confusing sometimes is the circular flow and the fact that we're going to potentially have flows that correspond to edges coming in and edges going out so for example if I had something like s and you and s could be the source in this case or it could be another node.

So we had a little sub network that looks like this with one and two for capacities this is a bit strange in the sense that you could have a situation where you essentially have zero flow really because you have one unit coming in to s and one unit leaving all right. And so you can have the circularity there. And then we're going to disallow cycles of two kinds. The first cycle we're going to disallow is the simple one where we say no self loop edges allowed so that would involve accumulation at a particular node, and most flow network algorithms assume that you're just going to discard these cycles And what we're going to do is we're going to take any pair of vertices that has this characteristic where you have s one, you and us one. And they have non zero capacity so s you has a capacity of one us has a capacity of two, both of these edges exist and if these edges exist that means they have a non zero capacity positive capacity right. And we're going to transform that very simply into something that satisfies this restriction so all I've done is introduce you prime right, then I can always do this.

If this is trivial for any pair of vertices I can introduce one other vertex and it all works out linear expansion constant factors ignore them. Life is great. So, all I've done is taken away the situation where I have you can think of it as a two way street right two way streets are annoying you don't quite know what the rate of traffic is from one end of the street to another because cars are going in both directions and you have to do subtraction subtraction is painful so we don't want to do that. So we're just going to assume that this is you prime. And now you're all set we allow this. So we have to allow for generality reasons, as we saw in our very first example we're going to have cycles here, but we just don't want cycles to be like some one or two okay so that's essentially what we're going to disallow.

The good news is if you do this then we only have a single notion of flow right. So let's let's keep going here to finish up max flow. Let's just get a sense of notation so what is flow well. Give you. Okay, so to be precise, it's going to be a function that satisfies the following properties that satisfies the capacity constraint, and then we've got flow conservation, and the important thing here is I don't have it for all V but I do have it for vertices be that are not the source or the sink. And I'm going to require f u v equals zero right.

And the last one which I haven't talked about but becomes easy to talk about it, given this this constraint is skew symmetry so if you take this doesn't have to be an edge between you and V now I'm talking about the flow f between you and V and so the you could be s right which is the source V could be T which is the sink. So in general I'm not talking about a flow, and obviously there has to be a path from you to be in order for there to be a non zero flow f u v right. If there's no path there's no way of getting there, but having said that the definition of a flow here in our network is the straightforward definition which simply says, if there's a flow from you to be regardless of a un VR, then the value of that flow is simply the value of the flow from V to you, which does make sense right. And this all works out under the definition of net flow but for our purposes here we don't have to add that adjective of net right we're just going to be talking about flows, positive or net they're the same for us okay. Some of the things that you can do with this notation. And we're going to use what's called implicit summation notation on top of this right is to prove some some interesting things interesting theorems that give you some intuition as to how algorithms on flow networks are going to work.

And in particular we're going to use this notation when we talk about the value of a flow. So the value of a flow f is denoted. You can think of it as a carnality of f and f is V belonging to capital V. F SV right well given a flow network I want one particular, I want one particular quantity that I want to maximize, and that particular quantity is going to be defined based on how much I can push from s how much I can push outward from s. That's the crucial quantity that I want to maximize that quantity is, you can think about everything that is going out of s, and you want to add it up all together. So if you look at one s, you look at any other vertex, every other vertex and you say what is f SV, and I'm not talking about just the edges that come out of s, a vertex v small v can be any vertex.

And if I add up all the flows that come out of s, then, then that's the flow that that responds to my network flow right my flow network. That's everything getting pushed out of s. Okay, when I talk about the flow of a network, I'm going to be looking at the source and I'm going to be looking at all of the flows that are outward. And I have to keep in mind the skew symmetry relationship, I obviously have to obey capacity constraints and the conservation laws as well right. So given that let's use this implicit summation notation to show some simple properties of flow. One thing I want to emphasize is what what we've done here is use this implicit summation notation which simply says, if I see a capital letter here that's a set, and I'm going to have to enumerate all the members of that set okay that's that's implicit summation notation.

So, so as I enumerate those members I'm going to add up all the quantities right that's really what this means. So the Sigma here gets embedded into our capital V so two things are going on the small v turned into capital V, because I'm looking at the entire set, and the Sigma goes in there to right and that's why it's implicit summation not just implicit set notation. Okay, okay, so some of the properties here. So, so some simple properties I can say fxx is zero where x is an arbitrary set. All that says is let's say x has a single member in it which is a, then fAA is always zero because you don't allow self loop edges. And in general, you can say, even though x and y are like cap x and cap y are sets of vertices I'm going to be able to use skew symmetry to say that f of cap x y is minus f of cap y x.

Alright, so similar argument there. And then lastly, there's any number of these we just do three of them here. X of f u y z is. I should have said union z is fx z plus f y z so we've got these properties to prove our first theorem on flow networks if x of x intersection y is no right so you don't want to double count. So that's that's we're just making sure we're not double counting here. So if you've got f of x union y, and you want to look at that entire set the union, then, and then look at the flow from any member in x union y to any member in z, right, and you can do that by breaking it up provided you're not careful about double counting and the fact that there are two sets x and y do not have an intersection or or they have a null intersection implies that you're okay with the right inside right.

So one of the things that we'd like to do is prove a pretty important theorem. And it's a very simple theorem that says I have the law of conservation that's applied on all these intermediate vertices. So I have two commodities and I've got a flow going out of s right so where can this flow go where does this flow end up, it ends up at the sink T right. So the point is that if you have all these properties that that we have up here. You're going to be able to show and you want to show this you want to prove this that the value of a flow, which is defined as what gets pushed out of the source is exactly what goes into the sink right. So if that's not the case then there's been a violation of some property perhaps a capacity constraint perhaps more likely a conservation constraint okay.

So the theorem that we'd like to prove is simply that f is f v T right that's the theorem. What I'm saying here is the f the value is exactly what gets pushed into the sink okay. So so this is what we have to prove, and we should be able to prove that by invoking our laws right that's it, what gets out of the source has to get into the sink right. So we're going to start with what we know so that's that's the proof k f equals f s cap v right. So this is the definition of carnality of f or value of fk. And what I'm going to do is I'm going to say this is the same as f of the minus s cap v right.

So what I've done here is look at s and I've said, think of this as being, think of this as as being cap v minus s right so that gives you s, and those are disjoint those are disjoint sets. And what can I say about either of those two quantities. F v v is zero right so I'm going to invert them and to write that out as f of v v minus s k. We just flip it out of negative sign, but we flipped it right and skew symmetry tells me I can do that okay. So I'm going to do this with the minus sign for now. So now what I'm going to do is I'm going to do f cap v t.

And the reason I want to do this is because this is where I want to get out right eventually I want to show something that corresponds to f v t right and what I have here is v t but now I could do v v minus cap minus s minus t right so what I've done here is taken v minus s and pulled out t from it remember t is part of cap v cap v contains all the vertices. So I pulled out t from it but that implies that I have to do a v minus s minus t. And again they're disjoint so it's all good. What can I say about the last added term on line for it's zero right because of flow conservation. For any you that's neither s nor t but in v the sum has to be zero. So that's zero and we're done okay so that's the power of implicit summation notation so we can invoke these different properties okay.

The next major concept is the concept of cuts. So a cut you can think of a cut as being cut through paper, a cut through air, whatever it turns out that notion of a cut in a network is more general than that okay a cut is basically a partition. A cut is a partition of nodes and a partition means that you can't have a node in both sides right so a cut is going to give you two disjoint components at the end of it. The cut doesn't have to be something like contagious it doesn't have to be a line through the network. And everything to the left of the line is in one half of the cut and everything on the right is in a different half of the cut. I can just break up these nodes into two disjoint parts.

And the only constraint that I'm going to ask for is the s which is the source is on one side of the cut and t which is the sink is on the other side of the cut okay that's it. Now let's define a cut a cut is cap s cap t of a flow network G. It's a it's a partition of V such that small s belongs to cap s and small t belongs to cap t. That's what we just said right. If a flow on G if f is a flow on G than the flow across the cut is FST. So again implicit summation notation here.

The flow across the cut is the same as the flows corresponding to each pair of vertices such that the source vertex is part of capital s, and the destination vertex is part of capital T right. I'm just going to add them all up that's that's the flow across the cut. So we have our same diagram from before this is going to be an example of a cut I haven't defined the cut yet. So the flow that's going into s is for right that happens to be our max flow doesn't really matter so we're going to talk with respect to cuts it doesn't require the flow to be maximum case so keep that in mind. What do I mean by the flow across the cut via an example. I'm going to simply say that the, the pink shaded nodes here two of them are part of capital s.

And now I can look at this and I can compute numerically for this example, what the flow across this particular cut is. Oh, defined by the particular choice of cap s and cap tk so FST is I'm going to have to look at a pair of nodes, such that I've got a shaded note on the left and a non shaded note on the right hand side okay. And I'm going to have to go through all the combinations right so I added letters ABC and D here for clarity. So we have s and D as being part of the cut in terms of s capital s and the other ones are in cap t right. And so what I have is, I could do s a and sb so I've got two plus two alright, and this will correspond to s a and sb. So those are going out right so far so good, and the minus two where would the minus two come from.

Well, ad, for example, is a minus two right because D is part of it would be da. So, ad has a flow of two, correct. So, da has a flow of minus two right and da is part of what I have here because D is part of capital s, and a is part of capital T so this is not trivial case so stay with me. So this would be for example the minus two would correspond to da. So, acd is one, so dc is minus one right and dc is minus one. And so you have to do the enumeration it's worthwhile doing this once and then it gets kind of boring we won't do this again.

But you have to realize that you have to absolutely look at every pair of vertices right and you have to use skew symmetry and ensure that even though there's actually no edge going out if there's an edge coming in you've got to do that. If there's an edge coming in you've got to count that right and that's going to get a negative whatever's coming in you've got to subtract okay. Now, I'd like to talk about the capacity of a cut and the relationship between the capacity of the cut and the flow of a network. So, the capacity of a cut is s, t, and we can do it exactly the same way, except this is a lot simpler because you only look at edges and you only have positive quantities. So in this case you'll simply say it's three plus two corresponding to what did I have I so da, sa and sd. And then the capacity is you only need to look at edges that go from a node in s to a node in capital T.

And so those are one plus three, and this simply would be the one would be db, and the three is dt. So you don't care about other flows this is not about flows this is simply about capacity. So this adds up to nine. Okay. And so we have at this point we have to find the flow through a cut, and we know the capacity of a cut. Okay.

The value of any flow is bounded by the capacity for any cut so what's cool about this is that you're saying that it's the value of any flow. You're, yeah, bounded by the capacity for any cut right. And so that's an upper bound on the maximum flow value right so I'm saying there's all these cuts that are possible in the network and I'm making a statement about what the max flow can be based on the values corresponding to the capacities for any cut right. So why is that the case well we're not going to prove that fully today that's the max flow min cut theorem, but you can certainly get a sense of it by looking at different at a different characterization of the max, or I'm sorry the flow value I should say. Here's another characterization of the flow value so our lemma here which is going to lead us to the statement is that for any flow F and any cut ST, we have a really powerful statement but it essentially says, look it doesn't matter what cut you choose you've got a flow on the network. And when you look at the flow on the network it's going to equal the flow across the cut.

And the only reason for this is simply because you've got a source on one side of the cut, and you've got a sink on the other side of the cut. That's it this is the only thing you need right you dump these vertices into two bins. So you've got the source on the left dump the sink on the right and you compute the flow the way we've defined it that's the flow. It doesn't matter how you partition the vertices as long as you've got the source on the left and the sink on the right okay. And so we can prove this using implicit summation notation we know that for any given cut the flow that is bounded by the capacity of that cut right we know that. Here's how we would show that if FST is fsb minus fss okay so I'm playing around.

I had taken the cap T I know that s union T is cap V right this is a partition. So I know that s union T is cap V so I can put a V here and an s as well right. And we've got a subtraction of course right and I could say something about one of those terms. The one on the right is zero right so call this fsv and now I'm going to break it up again make it small s big V plus fs minus s cap V. So broken line two up into small s which is just joined from cap s minus s right. You can use.

Oh, God. Sorry sorry. You can use flow conservation because the right side piece of line three does not contain T right. And then it clearly doesn't contain small s because I just took it out of it right so that goes to zero and voila this is simply fsv which we know is f we've already proved that. So our first implicit summation proof was showing that. Well I guess this is a definition, excuse me so we did it for the sink.

But this is simply the definition of the flow value right so this is beautiful I mean it's it's fantastic. If I weren't so tired I would be absolutely ecstatic about this. This is absolutely fantastic because this says, I have ways of figuring out what the max flow of the network would be by making arbitrary cuts through this network and looking for the capacities of these cuts right, because I know that the capacity of any cut and and now you see why why men cut is interesting right. But you know that the capacity for any cut is going to bound the flow of the network because the flow through a cut is the flow through the network okay. So if I go through and look at the min cut corresponding to the maximum capacity associated with the flow network. That's going to point me to my max flow, because that's going to be an upper bound on the max flow right.

And now you see why our men cut max flow theorem is an interesting one. And this is the beginning of that relationship we're not quite done to prove it but the beginning of the relationship is that you can look at any cut, and you can look at the flow through that cut as being the flow through the network. And then you can use the second part of it which is the capacity bounding of course in a very simple way because of edge capacities, the flow through a cut and you can put those two things together. We, we still don't know quite how to find these cuts right, and that's the last thing we're going to do today is give a sense of how to find these men cut so that we can find the max flow. One last notation that we have here is going to allow us to go into the algorithm domain, as opposed to the analysis domain. All we've done so far is is analysis analysis analysis is the notation of a residual network okay and a residual and the reason why the name implies is something that has residual capacities.

It's the network that points you to places where you can increase the flow because there's capacity left. Your flow is less than the edge capacity it's a local notion so it's easy to compute. There's a, you know, a capacity of three on this edge there's a flow of two the residual capacity is one right three minus two. The residual network is G F V E F right. So the actual network is G V E. Yeah, and the vertices are going to be the same.

The graph is obviously going to be different but the edges are going to be different. So there's going to be a different set of edges in the residual network as opposed to the flow network okay, and you have strictly positive that means greater than zero strictly greater than zero residual capacities. So CF, UV equals CV minus F UV, and that's strictly greater than zero. So I'm going to put an edge in there if if there is a residual capacity right zero doesn't mean that there's any residual capacity edges in in E F admit more flow okay, and one last thing here if V you does not belong to E so we're talking about the original network here, he means the original network, then we know CV you equals zero. Okay, that was our definition. If you don't have that edge the capacity is zero.

So now about F, which is a flow which doesn't necessarily require that there be an edge and we're simply going to use our skew symmetry relationship. It's going to be the case that we're going to have extra edges in the residual network that don't exist in the original network, because of our last line here right so let's clear that up. Let's bring back our example. She's a little different this time. So the flow here and the snt don't particularly matter. The max flow of G is for and the flow that you see here is three right this is what we have at the beginning okay.

So what I want to do now is is let's give you the residual network for this particular flow. Remember the residual network is defined based on a flow that's why you have G F G subscript f f is flow. You're going to have a different residual network if the flow is different right so the residual network has the same set of vertices and then we have G F that's a residual network, and the edges are going to be different. All I have to do is look at G. I'm going to have a residual capacity of two corresponding to the edge from s to you because I clearly have a capacity of three and I only have a flow one right. So that's all there is to it.

The interesting thing is that I'm actually going to define an edge in G F that corresponds to an edge that didn't exist in G, because I can shrink the flow from from one to zero, and essentially, that says that the shrinkage is represented in the residual network by an edge that goes from node you to s right, and that's going to have a residual capacity of one case so that's what the back edge shown here is. That's the only extra thing that you have to remember when you draw the residual network you cannot only not only can you increase the flow you can also shrink it. So you have to represent the shrinkage of the flow by an edge in the residual network, and you obviously represent the increase of the flow by an edge in the residual network right. Remember, in the beginning we had this example where we had to shrink the flow in a particular edge in order to get the overall flow to increase right the residual network is going to point us in the direction of potentially those edges whose flow have to shrink. So it's going to be represented in effect as these reverse edges with positive numbers associated with them. So, there's a one year from you to us, it's positive because it goes from you back to us.

And if I shrink this from one to zero that's an effect taking what I have in G, and making that one is zero. Okay, that's the way you want to think about this so that's pretty much it. So the edges that are at capacity and G aren't going to show up in GF the edges that are not at capacity and end up with two edges shown in GF, if they have a flow that is non zero right. If you have a zero flow up in G, you're only going to get one edge, obviously you'll you'll get one edge because the capacity is non zero, but the ones that are not quite at capacity and up with two edges okay so that's a simple rule here. So that is our residual network for this particular flow now what exactly can we do with the residual network it turns out that the algorithm now can be described in a couple of sentences right, essentially our Ford for Fulkerson algorithm right I'm going to prove that the max flow cut works next time, and we're going to talk about the Ford Fulkerson algorithm and issues with it next time, but I'm not. Well, yeah, I'm going to show you how the Ford Fulkerson algorithm works on on this particular example, and it's only going to have one step okay it's going to converge in one step.

So it's going to be relatively easy but the bottom line is the Ford Fulkerson algorithm is going to look for augmenting paths in GF K augmenting paths are defined in the residual network. What's an augmenting path you ask. Well, an augmenting path is simply a path from s in GF to T in GF okay. That's all there is to it if you can find a path you could use depth first search you could use breadth first search you could use whatever you want. If you find a path from s to T okay. If you find such a path if this path exists it means that the flow is not maximum okay.

If no path exists the flow is maximum and you're done. If such a path exists you will be able to increase the flow in this case because we have integral quantities by at least one okay, and you'll be able to increase the flow by one and. And not not only that the augmenting path is going to tell you exactly what to do with respect to what edges to change sometimes subtract the flow sometimes increase right so the augmenting path is going to take care of it because well but you flipped it right so everything's positive. So let's just look at s to T and give me any path from s to T here in the residual network so let's just call them UX Y and V we don't care about partitions or cuts at this point that's required for proofs but but give me a path from s to T so let's do. I have a residual capacity of two here right I have a residual capacity of one one and one yeah yeah okay so I've got a residual capacity of two one one one and the value of this augmenting path is one right it's not to because the minimum value is what I can push through the network and I just need to take the minimum of all the residual capacities corresponding to the edges that I traverse so that I corresponded to this particular path and the men of two one one one is one right. So what this means is I've discovered an augmenting path of residual capacity one.

Now I can go back to to G and these edges are going to point me in some cases to complimentary edges in some cases to the direct edges that are going to have their flows changed either increased or decreased to the minimum value of two one one one one. Increased or decreased to increase the flow. In the original network right so you're guaranteed now that F which caused this residual network to have an augmenting path was not maximum. You're guaranteed that right because we found a path. So what happens here when you go back to G and you say remember I'm going to increment increment by plus one, because that's my residual capacity. So I'm going to go back to G and I have S to you.

And so I'm going to make that to because I needed to add a one to it. Subtract and make the edge from you to X zero right next I have V to X which became zero. And then lastly V to T becomes three okay and at this point. If you create a residual network for this new flow you will not be able to find a path in that residual network from S to T and you know you're done right. So this all works we haven't quite shown that it works because we haven't done enough proofs but you have a sense as to why this works okay you can probably code this up right it would all work a couple of application discussions that we can have next time but let's let's talk more about this next time.