Okay, there we go. Okay, we're going to get started for today. We're going to start a new unit today. We're going to spend a few lectures on randomized algorithms. We will look at slightly different ways of solving old problems like sorting, and we'll also look at how we can analyze this new kind of algorithm that generates random numbers in order to actually make decisions as it's executing. And then we'll of course look at the analysis that gives us the expected runtime of the algorithm.

And we will look at whether the algorithm is going to produce a correct result or not, as well as with what probability this algorithm will produce a correct result. So I'll talk a little bit about. I'll talk a little bit about why we're interested in random algorithms in a couple of minutes, but let me define what a randomized algorithm or a probabilistic algorithm is to start things off. So a randomized algorithm is something that generates a random number. Now this would be this could be a coinage flip, but more often than not, you're generating a real number that comes from a sudden range. Sometimes you're generating a vector.

You'll see a couple of different examples here in today's lecture, and it's going to make decisions based on this value based on ours actual value. Okay. Now you can imagine that an algorithm would be recursive and at every level of recursion it's going to generate a random number are. So when you're executing at a particular level of recursion you may be doing different things based on our. And not only that if you rerun the algorithm again on the same input. The execution will be different because you're you're assuming a true random number generator, as opposed to a pseudo random one, and the ours that you're going to get at different levels of recursion or through the execution of the algorithm are going to be different from the first time to the second time.

So on the same input, excuse me on different executions two things might happen. The algorithm may run for a different number of steps so you might get lucky on the first execution and the algorithm finishes let's say 100 time units. The second time round it takes a long time it takes 700 time units. Our goal here is to try and analyze what this probabilistic runtime would be to ask for an expectation to be able to compute an expectation for the runtime, or if you're talking about a different scenario where the different executions. I could actually produce different outputs, right and in that case, it's possible that one or more of these outputs are incorrect. You actually get the wrong answer and obviously that's going to happen with a with a certain probability.

You're going to have to decide or analyze what that probability is. And generally speaking, we won't be happy with a high probability of error as you can imagine. And we'd like to set up an algorithm such that you can reduce that probability of incorrect output to be something really really small. And it might take you longer to get that low level of incorrect output in one case for a certain set of inputs versus another case. So that's the setup in here in terms of randomization. You're going to have algorithms that you can think of them as being probably correct.

So these are algorithms you want to think of them as probably correct, and they do have a name they're called Monte Carlo algorithms, and then you have algorithms that are probably fast. So you could have a constant probability that they're going to give you a correct answer, like 99%. And you could obviously try and parameterize that. In the case of probably fast, you say things like it runs in expected polynomial time. And really what that means is you may have to run it for more information. So rather than taking 100 iterations or 100 steps to sort something, it might take you 110.

But in the case of probably fast, you do get a sort of result at the end. And when the algorithm has finished execution, you do get that sort of result at the end. So it's correct and probably fast or probably correct and deterministically fast. Okay, and this is Las Vegas. So we have Monte Carlo and Las Vegas algorithms here. And what we'll do is we'll take a look at a couple of different algorithms and both of these will motivate why randomized algorithms are interesting.

The Monte Carlo example is checking matrix multiply. So you've gotten a couple of, you've got a couple of square matrices, both of them are n by n matrices and you're multiplying them out a times B you produce C. And so you have see the the C matrix and rather than re multiplying and checking the result you'd like to do something better. You'd like to verify with some probability that you can parameterize the output matrix. And that is in fact the product of the two input matrices. And so that's a randomized algorithm that's a Monte Carlo, because you're not guaranteeing that the output matrix is in fact the product of the first two matrices or the operand matrices, but you're you're getting a good sense of how likely that is.

And you can kind of squish that probability of error down to however low you want it to be, except you have to run the algorithm for longer. So that's an example of Monte Carlo. Now, sorry, here we go. Now, quick sort, which we're going to get to actually, let's stay here. So quick sort that we're going to get to it doesn't make any sense to say, well, I guess, I guess you could but doesn't make too much to say, sense to say that you have an almost sorted array like what does that mean. You have to categorize that so quick sort is an example where you're guaranteed to get a sorted array at the end of it.

So it's correct. You will get a sorted array. That's what you wanted to sending order a sending order or whatever. But it might not run in order and log in time that's expected time order and log in is expected time. And so that's what probably fast would correspond to. Alright, so, so that's our setup here you can kind of see why these are interesting because you could imagine in practical scenarios, you might want to do some checking in a probabilistic way, and you want to do that without having to redo all of the work.

Obviously, you don't want to your checker for matrix multiply to be as slow as multiplying to matrices, otherwise it makes no sense. So, let's dive into matrix product and our first example of a probably correct algorithm or Monte Carlo algorithm. So what I want to do here is capital C equals a times B and we know of an n cubed algorithm maybe you learned in high school. It's, it course it's simply corresponds to taking rows and columns, and you get an entry you have n square entries that you need to to compute corresponding to the output output matrix C. And you're going to do order n multiplication and additions but we're really going to consider multiplications here. When I talk about n here, it's not the total number of operations is the number of multiplications.

And the reason for that is that this may have gone away a little bit but it's still probably true that multiplication and computers takes longer. It takes longer to multiply two numbers integers are floating point numbers, then adding numbers right. It used to be much more dramatic the difference between multiplying and adding in computers. But thanks to pipelining and obviously lots of optimizations multiplies are pretty fast. But they are obviously more sophisticated than than a simple addition operation. So we'll be counting multiplies.

So what we'd like to do now is something better. So we'll try, given that theoretical computer science class that we're in here. It makes sense to say that our verification algorithm should be better than n raised to three right otherwise that doesn't feel great to us. So what we'd like to do is try to get an order and square algorithm. That's that's this right so it's, it's probably correct. It's a probably correct Monte Carlo algorithm, where if you have a times b equals C, then the probability of the output equals yes is one.

So in fact, if you got it right, then the verifier is going to not give you a false negative it's going to say, Nope, you got it wrong when you got it. It's sorry, excuse me, it's not going to say Nope, you got it wrong when you actually got it right. But it could give you up a false positive with some probability where you have the probability of output equals yes and that's a false positive. But you can bound that to be less than half okay so it's going to say yes. So obviously if the verifier kept saying yes all the time you wouldn't have this it wouldn't be very interesting. So it would be constant time but it wouldn't be very interesting.

What is interesting here is that when they're not equal you're going to get an incorrect result with some operand on the probability. So you say about one half seems kind of high 50% flipping a coin right. The good news is that these algorithms you can run them over and over you can run this checker over and over. Executions are independent and you can definitely ensure that they're independent by ensuring that the randomness from one execution to another remains intact, then the just like flipping a coin right independent on each flip. So that's, that's relatively easy to do. And, and certainly all the scenarios we'll be looking at we'll assume that in 381 pretty, pretty relatively easy to do here.

So you can drive this probability down to one quarter with two executions because you'll just check different things, and then one eighth was three and so forth so that's what's cool about it. And if you look at the runtime you say well runtime still order and square. That's the beauty of this because I'm just putting an extra constant factor here when I have K and square where K is a constant. And effectively I have this nice relationship in terms of the probability of error going down to one divided by two raised to the K. And what I have here is a K and square. So what's so so that's what's cool about it and obviously K and square is to order n square in polynomial time, but the probably correct gets better and better.

So what we're going to do is this algorithm actually works for arbitrary matrices, the structure at least. And we're going to assume that the matrix entries are Boolean they're they're going to work in the finite field mod two. And it's just an easier proof it's easier to see so the complexities are all the same you still multiplying numbers they happen to be small and multiplication costs one operation and you need to do n cubed multiplies to actually get the C matrix and you have to verify it in order and time. And so the number of make the number of multiplies again that you want to use in your verification algorithm has to be order n square because we're ignoring additions. So that's, that's what we'd like our matrix product checker to do. And, and the algorithm we're going to look at is called free volts algorithm.

So the algorithm itself is very straightforward in a couple of lines a minute or so we can we can describe it. And the interesting aspect of it is the analysis the fact that you can show that when a x, a times B I should say, doesn't equal C. So you're, you're going to get an incorrect result with about 50% probability. That's the cool part if you couldn't show that there's nothing cool about this algorithm right. So we're going to choose a random binary vector so so there's your randomness, and the binary vector. Every time you run it as the K increases, the random binary vector is different from one to another that's important you can't run the same thing again, and then expect a different result.

So you're going to assume that given that we're look, given that we're working in a binary space and this is a binary vector, you're going to assume that our I equals one. You're going to assume that our I equals one is half independently for our I equals one through n, and the algorithm essentially is this we're going to do a bunch of matrix vector multiplies. So n by n matrix multiplied by an n by n matrix gives you an n by n matrix and that's your n cute. So, I think I said this but these are all square matrices that are n by n, and that's that's where we get our n cute. And so what we're going to do is we're going to take this are, and we're going to compute a times B are. And so the brackets are important because it says that what it says that you're going to compute what's inside of the brackets.

Otherwise, it would be a problem, because you'd be multiplying a times B right and obviously that's that's order and cube right so we don't want to do that. So a times Br equals CR okay. So our remember is a column vector and see is an n by n matrix as our a and B, but we're going to output. Yes. Else, if these two are not equal you're going to output. No, okay, so that's it.

That's one run of the algorithm. Generating, you know, random R and doing the multiplication as you see here. So let's be clear about complexity and let's make sure we understand the simpler aspects of the algorithm before we get into the analysis associated with bounding the false probability for false. Sorry, the false positive probability. The hard part is going to be bounding the false positive probability, but the easy part is first the complexity so how many matrix vector products, am I doing here how many, how many matrix vector products am I doing here in this check on one iteration of the algorithm. Three right three matrix vector products because I've got to do B times are that's the matrix vector product remember I'm getting a column vector out of that which is important.

And then I'm going to multiply a with the column vector. So I'm going to multiply matrix vector product. Yep, no, yeah. Number two, and then there's a matrix vector product on the right side from C times are. So then at this point do you remember so I have a vector and a vector, and checking the equivalence of those two vectors is simply checking the equivalence of each element in the So the first one. Yeah, okay, so this is order n squared, but there's there's something that's worth thinking about simply because every once in a while we're interested in constant factors.

And the other thing that's interesting about this if a b equals C, then there's no issue associated with error here. So there's no notion of a false negative, because if a b equals C, then you know thanks to the associativity of matrix multiplication be it whether they're and by and matrix matrices or columns. You have this relationship that I've that I've shown to the right here of a br equals a br with your different parentheses. Essentially what I have here is if a b equals C so if in fact the matrix multiply happened correctly. I'm in a situation where it's clear that a br equals this thanks to the associativity of matrix multiply, and that of course is exactly the same as CR. So that should convince you thanks to the associativity of matrix multiply that you don't have any false negatives in this algorithm.

Okay. So we're all good. All we have to do given given what we have with respect to free vault is to do this part here which is which is going to take a little bit of doing and the challenge always with simple algorithms is you don't quite know why they work and then of course you have sophisticated algorithms and you don't quite know why they work as well. Okay, so you have an R vector that you've generated randomly, and it might be a bad vector it might be a vector that doesn't show you that the product matrix has an incorrect entry. Remember, there's n squared interest entries in this matrix. Exactly one of them may be wrong and you need to find it right.

So, so there may be a lot of entries which are all correct, but you've got to find that one entry that's incorrect so you could miss it, a given our vector might miss it and of course if you keep generating the ours you'd like to find it and declare that the matrices weren't multiplied correctly, and that probability is what we have to compute. So we want to get this result where we are analyzing the correctness in the case you've already analyzed the correctness in the case where a b equals C, but now we have to analyze the correctness in the case where a b is not equal to see right. And so the claim is that if a b is not equal to see then the probability of a b are not equal to see our is greater than or equal to half. So this is greater than or equal to right. Before we were just talking about the false negative probability where I'm actually getting an incorrect yes, when you have the matrices being multiplied wrongly incorrectly. And so that's why I get this is this is what I want I want there to be a greater than one half probability for our to have discovered that okay.

I'm going to compute the difference matrix I'm not and I'm not computing this because obviously this would take a while to compute right now. It's just for the purpose of analysis. I'm going to look at the difference matrix D equals a b minus C because you want D to be zero. And, and then we're going to do some analysis that says we're, we're going to try and find these non zero entries in D, because clearly the non zero entries in D tell you if there's a non zero entry in D, that you've got a problem right. Then the matrices weren't multiplied properly. So that's why we have D here.

Don't think of it as we're actually computing that. So what we'd like to do is as I said discover these entries where entries where hypothesis now is that D is not equal to zero because that's the case that we're considering we know that D is not equal to zero if the matrices were multiplied incorrectly. And when I say D is not equal to zero, it means that there are n square entries in D and one of them is not zero they all have to be identically zero that's, that's all it means D is not equal to zero means at least one entry is not zero. So, so now what we need to do is we need to show that there are many ours it's a binary vector of length n, and you can obviously think about two ways to end possibilities with respect to our, and what we what we really want to show is that there's a large fraction more than half of the ours are going to actually discover that the matrices were multiplied incorrectly. Okay, so what we so we want to show that there are many ours such that DR is not equal to zero. And because if DR is not equal to zero then you're obviously going to discover that a br is not equal to CR.

So if a br is not equal to CR that's identical to saying, DR is not equal to zero that hopefully makes sense. So specifically, if you look at the claim and writing it in terms of DR, you want to say that the probability of DR not equal to zero is greater than or equal to half for randomly chosen r. So that's the setup that we have to show we have we have to do a counting argument corresponding to these are vectors that are being generated randomly. So the general argument that we're going to make here is simply that if you're looking at, if you're going to look at a bad R what is a bad R, and bad R is something that doesn't discover the incorrect multiplication. Okay, that's that's what it is. So your D is not equal to zero but DR equals zero okay that's a bad R right it's quite possible that that would be the case and so you want to try to try and figure out how many of these bad are are there.

Because those are the ones that are causing the false negatives right so the counting argument is the crux of the proof of this claim. And what we're going to do is we're going to pick a bad R and we're going to say it, you know, if there are these good R's that are associated with this bad R we want to see them. And for every bad R there's a good R and a good R is something that actually discovers the incorrect multiply and for every bad R. There's a good R half of the ours are good R. Okay, that's it. Okay, so that's that's the sense of the essence of the argument.

So let's look at the case where DR equals zero. Because that's that's the interesting case. That's the case where the R is bad, even though we had an incorrect multiply. And you get this I should have said when when you get a false positive so sorry I think before I just said false negative but I meant false positive. Do you have a false positive in this case, and D equals AB minus C, not equal to zero implies there. There exists an I and J such that DIJ is not equal to zero okay.

And there's just one entry at least if you say the matrix is not equal to zero there's got to be an entry that's not equal to zero. So let's take a look at that entry let's just draw it out here. So my my larger square that's that's my D matrix, and there's going to be an I and a J. So I've got my I throw my jth column here. And I've got an entry which is DIJ. And I'm just picking that I don't care what I and J are, but there's got to be an entry that's not equal to zero.

So create a vector V. So this vector is not our it's a vector V that's chosen deterministically given where the DIJ, given the DIJ where it's got zeros everywhere, except at the I be I. If this is the, the jth element, I'm sorry the ice element column wise everywhere else you have zeros. And so you just have the one associated going going downward the ice entry okay. So if it's a one one hot vector, if you will, it's got one one. So, so now if you multiply these two things out, you know that they're going to get something and we're going to call.

We're going to call that dV. So if you take D and you multiply it by V matrix multiplied by a vector, you're guaranteed, given that my entries in VR zero when I do my I times my these all of them are going to produce zero. DIJ times one is going to produce something that's non zero, and then all of the other ones are going to produce the zero. So I'm just adding a bunch of zeros to my DIJ non zero multiplied by one. So I'm going to get something that's non zero right. So I'm going to see in my resulting vector, which is the I entry that's not zero.

And so that implies that dV is not equal to zero. In particular, what I'm saying is if dV of J. So, so if I look at the entry that's identically DIJ, which is not zero, because I'm multiplying it by one, and I'm adding a bunch of zeros to it. That's it. Okay. So if so DIJ is not zero.

And this is one more observation we're going to make in order to do the counting of these bad ours, because this is a bad R that we're looking at. And we say that dr equals zero, you've created a V that has nothing to do with our but we're going to use the V to go from a bad R, which is our example here to a good one. So that's pretty much it that's our, that's our next step here. And so what we're going to do is we're going to take any R that can be chosen by our algorithm, such that dr equals zero, because that's the case we're looking at, and we're going to compute our prime, which is our plus V. And just remember this is mod two arithmetic you're only getting zeros and ones. So if you have one plus one, it gives you zero obviously zero plus zero gives you zero, and other cases are clear right.

And this plus here, remember is also the other thing that's important is this is not only mod to these are all vectors. So ours a vector, and you can think of it as a column vector that's how that's how we drew it before, you're adding up a column vector with a V. That's the column vector the way that we drew it on the last slide. You can do it with rows if you like, but it's just notation, and you're going to compute an r prime here. And what can you say about dr prime then we can say that it's not zero, because our prime is r plus V and dr gives you dr plus DB is not zero. So what's cool about this is the final step which I think I hope you understand, but I'm just going to say it out loud now, which is that r to r prime is one to one for any given r such that dr equals zero, given the situation where capital D is not equal to zero.

And there's some Dij, and there could be many Dij's I just need one. I've constructed based on that Dij this V vector which has the J's entry corresponding to the, no the I entry corresponding to the V vector being a one with all of the other entries being a zero. But I can now create an r to r that is one to one in the sense that if our prime equals r plus V, and that equals our double prime plus V so if I ever have a situation where in order to show there's one to one I want to say that it's not too many one to one or even two to one. So if I have an r prime that equals r plus V and you tell me that our prime also equals our double prime plus V, I can make an argument that r and our double prime are exactly the same. So then r equals our double prime. So what am I saying here, I'm just saying that for any given r that has dr equals zero, I can twiddle the jth element of that are and go from zero to one or one to zero.

So if you ever. So if you tell me that there's a Dij somewhere in that matrix that is non zero, and I do that little twiddle remember it's all zeros and ones Boolean matrices. So if I do one twiddle it's one to one if I do two twiddles, I go one to zero and I'm back one again. That's all this says, because you have mod two so that's all we're doing one little tweak and I'm going to be able to take a bad R and turn it into a good R, because the good R the R prime in this case had dr prime not equal to zero. That's it okay that's that's my counting argument, and all that remains is to essentially close this by saying, just to write this out and to get the final claim, and get the one half the one to one essentially gives you the, the one half right. At least half of these things are going to be good ours.

If you had a dr that's not equal to zero and that's the case that you have here, then we're going to discover an r prime such that the dr prime is not equal to zero, and our dr prime is a one to one mapping. So the number of our prime for which dr prime is not equal to zero is greater than or equal to the number of our for which dr equals zero. And that implies that the probability of dr not equal to zero. So if you just, if you just choose an R this is, this is now randomly chosen are the others not that the others weren't but I'm treating it a little bit differently here. So the first line on the slide was a specific are for which dr was equal to zero. I made an argument that you can always get this r prime one to one such that dr prime is not equal to zero.

And now going back to what I had initially with respect to the claim here, where the R here was a randomly chosen are, I'm saying thanks to this little argument, this, this line of top. And we're able to say that this is greater than or equal to one half. So summarize, okay, we have a bound, we run it over and over and we get to, we get it to the point where we can have a point 001 probability that if the matrices were multiplied incorrectly that you wouldn't discover that, because you ran it for enough hours independently chosen that that probability becomes as low as possible. Okay. So, let's do a Las Vegas algorithm and you guys are probably thinking my goodness another sorting algorithm after so so many. This, this all sorry.

Anyway, we've learned a bunch so far right merge sort doesn't work and the reason it doesn't work in practice. If you're if you're really into performance is because of the auxiliary space that merge sort requires. So if you recall there's a notion of in place sorting. And I'm just going to be asking here which is quick sort which is a new sorting algorithm. And I want to motivate it for just a couple of minutes here and the primary motivation really is a practical performance not as a mott assent on complexity. So I'll be upfront about that with you it's all about practical performance corresponding to quick sort and quick sort is a divide and conquer randomized algorithm.

Unlike merge sort it's got two interesting properties the first is that it's in place just like I said so no auxiliary space. And around this sometimes I should say order and auxiliary space you need a little temporary variable in order to do a swapping. But you don't have the order and auxiliary space here. So you don't have to be you don't have to constantly allocate. And remember and could be large, it could be in the billions or trillions so from that standpoint quick sort ends up winning simply because of relatively mundane things like memory allocation in your computer. And the other interesting thing about quick sort in relation to merge sort is that all the work is in the divide step.

So in merge sort remember we just split and we recurse and what happens when you come back is you have to do that that finger emerging algorithm by looking at the two sorted arrays and looking at whether the new merger, looking at what it's going to look like so the work is in the merge. But in quick sort the work is going to be in the divide because we're going to have to do a bunch of work associated with figuring out how to keep the partitions balanced a little bit like, like we had to do when we did median finding a couple weeks ago. I'm going to talk about a couple different variants of quick sort. The variant we're going to spend the most time on is Las Vegas quick sort where we'd like to show that it's probably fast and make a statement about the expected run time so before we get to the variance of course let's try and set up a structure corresponding to quick sort. And as always we have an end element array a you have divide that corresponds to picking an element x in a, and then we're going to partition the array into sub arrays and what we have here this little picture should hopefully make things more clear. And you kind of saw this in median finding but here we go again.

Let's assume all the elements in the array are unique, all the array elements yeah are unique. We have L, E and G, L is less than G is greater than. And so your pivot element is going to break this array up into L and G, where you've got all the elements that are less than on the left, and all the elements that are greater than on the right, and you're going to recurse on the L and the G so recursively sort sub arrays L and G. Combine is trivial or merges is trivial because you've already broken things up thanks to the pivoting, and you just concatenate those arrays. And that's why you can do this in the first place there's no issues you're really recursively sorting sub arrays. You're moving things around a little bit when you do the partition.

Obviously the initial array may have all the elements you you may pick the pivot such that the pivot is all the way on the right hand side, in the sense that it's a very large element that's not necessarily a good thing I will talk about that. But if you pick an interesting pivot or a good pivot you're going to have to move the elements in the array to the left of the pivot if they're less than the pivot, and you've got to move the elements to the array to the right in the array to the right. If they are to the right of the pivot right. Non trivial piece of code not super complicated but you can Google to look at in place partitioning where you don't have to use another order and space to move these elements around such that they look like that that picture that we have up there, starting from some random starting point. So you want to have the picture that we have here maybe in your array X is somewhere else, I guess, you know, maybe, maybe we have an X plus one where I'm all I'm trying to get out is maybe they're not sorted. Maybe they're scattered, for example, and you need to move those things around so that they look like L e and G.

So that you've got your lessons in the right place and your greater thans in the right place and that's something that we can do in place, and you can look at code for that online I won't necessarily cover that here. So let's look at a bunch of different variants corresponding to quick sort and there's some real simple ones each of these we can knock off with respect to complexity and runtime fairly easily with one exception that will spend some time on which is last biggest quick sort. So let's talk about basic quick sort first which is also a useful algorithm that people use in practice and amazingly this algorithm is simply something that says, I'm just going to constantly pivot on either the first entry or the last entry. So I'm going to pick my pivot to be a one and when I pick my pivot to be a one it's a value that I'm talking about here X is a value it's not an index, the a one value maybe that 75, then I'm going to create my L matrix corresponding to this pivot, where all the entries are strictly less than 75 and G would be strictly greater than 75. And I could do that for a one, and I could do that for a and so remember that the pivot is a value. Now if I look at this, I'm going to do the partition given X just like you saw there, and for there before, and this is going to be done in order and time, and it makes sense that you're going to look at every element, and you're going to move it to an pivot location to the left of X which is in the e array, or to the right, and, and you'll do that that takes order and time and as I mentioned, you can look at this and see how this is done in place right.

So let's take a look at the analysis of basic quick sort and what I'm interested in is of course the worst case analysis. And I asked this question I think before we were when we were doing median finding but what is the worst case complexity of a basic quick sort algorithm that chooses the pivot as. A one what's what's that complexity. Think about that for one second. It's order and square right. And the reason for that is that you may have an array that is sorted in reverse reverse sorted backwards from what you want, depending on whether you're you're picking a one or a and you can have a worst case situation where one side L or G. has n minus one elements and the other has zero elements.

And so if you look at our recurrence associated with this. If you look at our recurrence recurrence associated with this you could have T and which is T zero plus T and minus one plus data and. I have data in here well remember that I still have to do this divide step or the partition step in order to compute the. Unbalanced array so so I do have to look at each of these elements to do the comparison and maybe I don't actually have to move them but I have to do the comparison with a one which is the X pivot. And in some cases if I'm doing the wrong. The wrong thing like reverse sorted.

I also have to do the move. So either way I have a theta and complexity associated with the divide steps so if you go off and look at what happens with this well. You've got T n equals T and minus one plus data and which ends up with theta and square complexity. So basic quick sort looks bad. It's got a worst case complexity of theta and squared it works well on random inputs and practice and it turns out that it's a fashion of it's it's a nice algorithm. Partly because it's it's in place and it's easy to code and that's what people do is they take their inputs and they shuffle them right.

You might get a bad input and it might take you a long time to run, but if you take an input and you shuffle it and you do that and theta and time you just move things around and randomize the input. Then effectively you have a random input and this thing works pretty well in in practice. Now what's pretty well well we're going to do an analysis that is going to not be exactly the analysis that you'd have to do on a basic quick sort or random inputs but essentially you can say that basic quick sort on random inputs is going to run in expected theta and log in time. That's all I really want to say about about basic quick sort it's a practical algorithm it does require a little bit of shuffling up at the beginning, and then you can simply use the pivot a one and because you've done the shuffle. Generally you get balance partitions. The LNG look balanced and then you don't end up with theta and square.

If you have any sort of balance associated with the two partitions LNG, you're going to get a nice divide and conquer which is going to give you your theta and log in. Okay, so basic quick sort. Suppose I wanted to use the quick sort strategy and get a worst case theta and log in through an intelligent pivot selection. So now I want to do pivot selection intelligently how I just gave you the answer. How would I select a pivot such that I get worst case theta and log in complexity. If you saw you saw but we're going to go back to this idea of linear median finding.

So the intelligence pivot selection algorithm is the the median finding algorithm, because that's going to guarantee me that I'm going to get my balance partitions. If you tell me that a one, and remember, we're talking medians of values. So don't get confused with indices here. When I say something's a median I'm talking about the value that given its value. There are all these other and over two values that are less than it roughly speaking, and and over two values that are greater than it. And so a one, I have no idea whether it's large or saw or small.

So I couldn't say much about it. But if I want to be worse case and I want to guarantee that I have balance partitions, I can choose the medium. And if I choose the median every time. I'm going to get perfectly balanced partitions they're going to be half on the left and half on the right. And we do know a way of getting balance partitions we can guarantee that balanced LNG using median selection. And we can guarantee that runs in theta and time and we showed that a couple lectures ago.

Well, that median selection now was non triplet. Okay, it had this weird thing where you broke things into five sub arrays of size five and you found a median of medians, etc, etc. But we argued that the whole thing ran in theta and time which is important. And so now if you look at what happens was quick sort if I write the recurrence for quick sort thanks to selecting a median, I effectively have balance partitions. I've got to T and over to that's important. Otherwise it won't work.

And then just to be very clear here I've got to theta and terms okay the first theta and term is the recursive median selection. And the second theta and term is of course the divide or partition, but it's important to realize that now I have a lot of work in the divide a lot of work, I have to do an intelligent selection using this median recursive median finding algorithm. So that's what it's comparing and then generate and the the G arrays right. Okay, so those are the two theta ends there. They're obviously theta and but I want to make it clear that there's two things going on here, and we all know that this is theta and log in worst case alright. There is a way of using the quick sort structure template and getting a theta and log in worst case algorithm, which doesn't work in practice because it's just too complicated.

What's going on here is that every level of recursion, you're calling another recursive algorithm to find the median. So if you go code this up. It loses to merge sort in practice you can do all of this in place but because of all these recursive calls, it doesn't work well in practice, but it's good to know. And so this is a good example I think which we don't anyway but we don't do like a whole lot of these kinds, but you get a sense of the difference between asymptotic complexity and performance. So while the median finding algorithm has better asymptotic complexity worst case it really loses in practice due to the basic quick sort, which is essentially it's just a bit of a hack where you take the input and you randomize the input, and you run it with a one as the pivot or a n as the pivot. Is there a different way that you can actually get to a Las Vegas algorithm.

Next question, and it turns out randomized quick sort is something you can build and use which is a bit different from the basic quick sort and certainly different from median finding, but it has a little bit in common with them, and it's our example of a Vegas algorithm. So what happens at randomized quick sort and X is chosen at random from the array a so you're not choosing a one or a n you might just flip will effectively an inside and die and dice and pick a particular index, and then go grab the pivot corresponding to the value with that index you're not going to get random, you're not going to randomize over values you don't know what these values are but you can pick a random index and then grab the pivot based on the value at that index. And so, so at each recursion a random choice is made, and the expected time so so now we're saying something different. We're making a stronger theoretical statement that the expected time when you do this for all inputs. Arrays a is order and log in. And so now this is not worst case it's expected time.

So this is going to be our analysis in the last few minutes here is to analyze a, a random quick sort, randomized quick sort, but a slight, we're going to look at a slight variation of randomized quick sort that's going to show that you can run randomized quick sort and this variant in order and log in time. What we're going to do here is analyze a variant quick sort, which is a little bit easier to analyze and it gives you a sense of why in fact the randomized quick sort is going to run in expected time. So this, this particular variant we're going to call paranoid quick sort. And so this quick sort is paranoid in the sense that it's going to be afraid of getting unbalanced partitions. And so it's going to try to keep balanced partitions. So it's not going to, it's not going to try to get a balance partition it's going to check and then if it fails it's going to try again.

And so at the end of it there's obviously an expected associated an expectation associated with the number of tries that you need in order to get a balanced partition. But it sort of just flips the problem on its head and says, you know what, I'm just going to guarantee a balance partition from a probabilistic standpoint. And it might take me a little bit longer to get there but that's what Las Vegas algorithms are all about. They're probably fast and once I get a balanced partition I'm in good shape because I can go do my recursion. And I get my divine and conquer working properly. So what's paranoid quick sort absolutely straightforward.

So you can probably guess given my description. So let's just choose a pivot to be a random element of a perform the partition and then the values will repeat. So we're going to go off. And so what we say until the resulting partition is is such that the cardinality of L less than or equal to three quarters of carnality of a and the carnality of G is less than or equal to three quarters the carnality of a. So I'm going to give you a certain amount of imbalance but not a lot right and that's it that's that's paranoid quick story. You obviously are going to do that in each level of the recursion, and at each level of the recursion your L and G are going to be at most a factor of three apart.

So one quarter and three quarters if you're lucky you'll get one half and one half, but in the worst case given that you're going to be exiting out of out of the loop is one quarter and three quarters. So as always you have a simple algorithm, but it's not completely clear how you're going to get to expected and log in time. It's not too difficult. Basically what we have to do is we have to try and figure out what the probability of a good call is a good pivot choice and what the probability of a bad pivot choices. And we have to obviously given the given the potential imbalance we have to write the recursion the recurrence associated with that. Let's take a look at the pivots here first.

And what can we say about the size of L and G if you just did a random pivot. Well a bad call is when you get something in L or G that is less than a quarter and a good call is when you get something between a half well roughly if you look at the choice of pivot right roughly. And the thing I have here is is the choice of pivot. If my pivot is on the left side I have a very small L and and the thing is is on the right is G. If the pivots on the left, I have a small L and a large G. If the pivots on the border between L and E I'm good I've got one quarter and three quarters.

And the middle part is in E the middle section I've got a half and a half and so on and so forth. And so the middle part is good here so that's all this picture is trying to show a good call. So so a good a call is good with what probability then given this picture a call is good with what probability greater than or equal to one half right. So now what you can now write simply is if Tn is in is the time required to sort the array essentially, you can say Tn is T of n divided by four plus T of three and divided by four plus expected number of iterations in terms of getting a good partition times C times n. And there is a reason why I'm putting C in here as opposed to theta that will become clear in just a second, because I can't really apply the master theorem to this given what I have with respect to T over four and three and over four. So what I have here is I'm looking at the case where I could get an in balance partition, but the imbalances bounded so I'd have n over four on one side, and three and over four on the other side, but I'm not going to have an over five and four and over five or what is the time required to get a good partition.

And so that's the two recursive calls so that's hopefully easiest to see the part that's new here is simply the complexity of our paranoid quick sort code, which is obviously the randomized algorithm that's exactly where the randomness comes in because you're picking a random pivot and you're checking it. And so this is going to run a certain number of times, and we can figure out what the expectation is in just a minute. And so this is n because it's a constant time to choose a random number will assume that that performing the partition is C times and or say to end and that's why I put this up here. And so the expected number of iterations given what I have. What can I say about the expected number of iterations using simple probability rules. What is that.

It's two right one one over one over P all of them are independent so this is, I should have that. So this is two. So, so now what I have is T of n, I want to solve T of n equals T of n over four plus T of three and over four plus two times CN. And again, like I said, I didn't put a theta and in here because as you'll see, when I draw the tree out, because it's not a massive theorem invocation that it's it's worth looking at from a constant factor standpoint to really get the sense of how this all works. So let's draw our tree of so so if I draw the tree of execution I start counting basically what I have is to see and about the top. And I have one over four times to see an over on the left.

I have three over four times to see an over on the right, and then you can see the rest, etc. This is an unbalanced tree because you have an unbalanced partition up on top. And now you want to count up all the work that this tree does. If you collect up all the operations then that's going to tell you what T of n is, because that's all the work that you have to do in order to finish up at the top level of recursion. And, and what you can say is if you look at the right side here all the way to the right side, you're going to have log to the base for over three times to CN levels. So that's just simply every time you're multiplying by three over four, when you get down to the number one, and that's log of four over three.

And then going over to the left side it's a little bit easier to think about because it's a power of two, you're going to have log of four to the base four times to CN levels. And really it doesn't matter honestly when we go to asymptotics but it's worth seeing I think just to get a sense of why it all works out, regardless of whether it's balanced or imbalanced. Eventually you get down to theta one constants down below and basically what you can see if you just add it up. It's one over four plus three over four is one one over 16 three over 16 obviously those all end up being one. So you have to see and work at each level. And if you just go ahead and be pessimistic about it.

There's a maximum of log four over three times to CN levels, and that's pretty much it. Obviously now you can start ignoring the constants you just keep the log here, you don't care what the basis you've got an end. So you drop the to see drop the four over three drop the to see, and you get your and log in. And that's pretty much it. But, but you've got an example of a Monte Carlo algorithm. You've got an example of a Las Vegas algorithm so.

So that's that and see you next time.