Okay. Let's go here. Okay. So our very first module of the second half of this course is really going to technically start next time. This is an overview lecture, but it's a module on divide and conquer. And you learned about this divide and conquer paradigm in the earlier lectures, maybe even a previous class.

It's it's breaking. It's the breaking of a problem into smaller problems and getting efficiency that way. Merge sort is a classic algorithm that follows the divide and conquer paradigm. Now we're going to take material from the first half of the lectures and raise the stakes. A little bit raise the level of sophistication. And you'll see things like fast Fourier transform finding an algorithm for a convex hole.

We'll do that. We'll do that next time that uses divide and conquer paradigm. We're going to do a ton of optimization. Divide and conquer can obviously be used for for search and also for a lot of other things. In particular, we're going to look at strategies corresponding to greedy algorithms. Dykstra's which hopefully you remember the shortest path algorithm from earlier lectures and it is an example of the greedy algorithm.

We'll see a bunch of other examples and we'll look at one today. And dynamic programming. It's a wonderful algorithmic hammer that you can apply to a wide variety of problems, certainly to to short a short a short time. We'll look at it in in many different contexts. And then and then really quickly, network flow, which is a problem that's associated with here's a here's a network this capacity is associated with the network the capacities correspond. They could.

They could respond to the width of the roads in a highway system or the number of lanes the amount of traffic that can go through. How do I maximize the set of commodities or the amount of commodities that I can push through the network that it turns out is again a problem that I can't solve. So it's really a collection of problems. You're going to spend some time a little bit today but a little more than in previous lectures talking about intractability. So a lot of algorithms that we're going to talk about are efficient in the sense that they're polynomial time solvable and and first polynomial time solvable doesn't imply efficiency in a in a practical sense. So if you have an N raised to eight algorithm, it's polynomial time.

But really, it's not something that you can use on real world problems where you can use a lot of the same things. But generally in a theoretical computer science class, we'll think about practical problems as being those that have polynomial time algorithms that can solve them exactly or optimally. But in but in tractability, then corresponds to problems that at the moment we don't know of. So the next question is what happens with those problems and we'll look at things like approximation algorithms that can get us in the case of optimization problems. So we're going to talk about a little bit about the problem that we have. So we're going to talk about the best algorithms to solve them and the best algorithms we have take worst case exponential time.

And so the next question is what happens with those problems and we'll look at things like approximation algorithms that can get us in the case of optimization problems. Get us to within a certain fraction of optimal guaranteed and run in polynomial time. That may be the absolute best, but you can get within 10% or we can get within a factor of two. That may be enough for a particular instance of a problem or a set of instances of a problem. And what we do, we're going to look at advanced topics. So I think we have a distributed algorithms plan and we'll also talk about cryptography.

There's a deep connection between number theory algorithms and cryptography that towards the end of the lecture or, or I should say towards the end of the course. I'll look at a little bit more closely with you guys so so that's a that's a brief overview. Let's start with today's lecture for real. So I came for today's lecture I talked a bit about tractability and intractability. And what is fascinating about algorithms is that you might see a problem that has a fairly obvious polynomial time solution or linear time solution, then you change it ever so slightly and the linear time algorithm doesn't work maybe you can find a cubic algorithm and then you change it a little more, and then you end up with something that you can't find a polynomial time algorithm for you can't prove that the polynomial time algorithm or polynomial time algorithm gives you the optimal solution in all cases. And then you go off into complexity theory, you maybe discover that or show that this problem is NP complete.

And now you're in the intractability domain. And so so very small changes in problem statements can end up with very different situations from a standpoint of algorithm complexity. And so that's really what I want to point out to you in some detail with with a concrete example. So I want to get a little bit pandemic here with respect to intractability and tractability. You've seen I think these terms before and in one previous lecture but we'll go over this in some detail today and then more later on in the semester. But for now let's recall some basic terminology associated with tractability and intractability or complexity theory broadly speaking.

Capital P is a class of problem solvable and polynomial time. And I think I think of that as big O and raised to K for some constant K. Now you can have log factors in there but once you put a big O in there you're good. You can always say order and even if it's a logarithmic problem and big O less you be sloppy like that right. There are many examples of polynomial time algorithms of course for for interesting problems like shortest paths. So the shortest path problem is order v square where v is the number of vertices in a graph.

There's algorithms for that you can do a little better if you use fancier data structure but that's that's an example. NP is another class of problems that's very interesting. This is the class of problem that whose solution is verifiable in polynomial time. So an example of a problem in NP that is that is not known to be NP is the Hamiltonian cycle problem. And the Hamiltonian cycle problem corresponds to given a directed graph find a simple cycle so you can repeat vertices but you need the simple cycle to contain each vertex in v and determining whether a given cycle is a Hamiltonian cycle or not is is simple. You just traverse the cycle make sure that you've touched all the vertices exactly once and then you're done clearly doable and polynomial time.

So therefore Hamiltonian cycle is an NP but determining whether a graph has a Hamiltonian cycle or not is a hard problem. And in particular the notion of NP completeness is something that defines the level of interactability for NP the NP complete problems are the hardest problems in NP and Hamiltonian cycle is one of them. If you can solve any NP complete problem in polynomial time you can solve all problems in NP in polynomial time. So that's what I mean by saying that NP complete problems are in some sense the hardest problems in NP because solving one of them gives you everything. So the definition of NP completeness is that the problem is in NP and is as hard an informal definition right is as hard as any problem in NP. And so Hamiltonian cycle is an NP complete problem.

Satisfy ability is an NP complete problem and there's a whole bunch of them. So going back to our to our theme here what I want to show you is how for an interval scheduling problem that I'll define in a couple of minutes, how we move from linear time therefore P to something that's still in P but it's a little more complicated if I change the constraints of a problem a little bit. And finally if I add more constraints to the problem generalize it and you can you can think of it as adding constraints or generalizing the problem. You get small changes to something that becomes NP complete. So this is this is something that algorithm designers have to keep in mind because you go off and try to design an algorithm for a problem. You like to know where this where in the spectrum your problem resides.

And in order to do that you need to understand algorithm paradigms obviously and be able to apply them. We also have to understand reductions where you can try and translate one problem to another. And if you can do that the first problem is to know is known. When the if your first problem is known to be hard, then you can make arguments about the hardness of your problem right. And these are the kinds of things we'll we'll touch on today and the analysis of the algorithm the the design of the algorithm and also then the complexity analysis of the algorithm, which may not just be an asymptotic. Right like well this is order n cubed or order n square but more in the realm of NP completeness as well.

So, okay so much for context let's dive into our interval scheduling problem which is something that you can imagine for classes, tasks a particular schedule during the day. Your life in general really. And in the general setting we have resources and requests and we're going to have a single resource for our first version of the problem. And requests are going to be one through n and we can think of these requests as requiring time corresponding to the resource. So the request is for the resource and you want time on the resource maybe it's computation time, maybe it's your time it could be anything. Each of these requests, I'm sorry each of these request response to an interval of time.

And that's where the name comes from. SI is start time fi is finished time, and we're going to say SI is strictly less than fi I didn't put less than or equal to here because I don't want these requests to be non no non zero. So otherwise, they're uninteresting. And we're going to have a start time and we're going to have an end time and they are not equal. So that's the first part of the specification of the problem and then the second part which is intuitive is that the two requests we have a single resource here remember, I and J are considered to be compatible which means you can satisfy both of the requests they're compatible and and compatible requests you can't satisfy with your single resource simultaneously provided they don't overlap and an overlapping condition might be that fi is less than or equal to s J or f J less than or equal to si. So I put less than or equal to here which is important to spend a minute on what I'm saying is in this context is that I really have open ended intervals on the right hand side corresponding to my fi so pictorially you could look at it this way.

So I have two intervals that look like this so we've got interval number one and interval number two, and I have s of one f of one s of two and f of two. I'm allowing s of two and f of one to be exactly equal. And I still agree that these two are compatible requests so. So this is, I guess it's terminology it's our definition of compatibility. So I will imagine an optimization problem that's associated with interval scheduling where in a in a different example I have this interval corresponding to s one and f one. I might have a different interval here corresponding to two and then corresponding to three, and then maybe I've got I've got four or five and six.

So I have six different intervals corresponding to my input. I have a single resource I'm just drawing out in two dimensional form here. There's six different requests that I have the six different intervals intervals and requests are synonymous also. The whole here it's kind of obvious in this example is to select a compatible subset of requests or intervals that is of maximum size, and I'd like to do this efficiently so we'll always consider efficiency here but in terms of the specification of the problem, as opposed to a requirement on the complexity of the maximum. Yeah, I want I want maximum size for this subset. So as I showed you or I mentioned earlier, in this case it's clear from the drawing that I put up here that the maximum size for the six requests.

I'm sorry. Yeah, the six requests example that I have here is is three. So that's the setup. And we're going to spend the next few minutes talking about a greedy strategy for solving this particular problem. If you don't know of it, the greedy strategy is always going to produce the maximum size or not. In fact, it depends on the particular greedy heuristic right the selection heuristic that a greedy algorithm uses.

So that's going to be important and we'll take a look and hopefully we will Yeah, we'll look at a few different greedy heuristics here. But my claim my overall claim that I'm going to have is let's let's spend a bunch of I'm going to just spend a bunch of time justifying and eventually proving is that we can solve this problem using a greedy algorithm. So that's a greedy algorithm. Okay, you've seen some examples. As the name implies, it's something that's myopic it doesn't look ahead it looks to maximize the very first thing that you that you could maximize it like traffic is a good example don't let anybody cut in front of you. We all drive like this you've got some room up there get up there right people.

Generally people are greedy when it comes to getting to work trying to minimize the time and in this case, on the time that they're spending on the road. But we've had other examples. For example, when you look at interval scheduling you might say I'm going to pick the smallest request, and I'm going to pick the smallest request first and I'm going to try to collect together as many requests as possible and if the requests are small in the sense that si and fi for the two requests are close to each other, then maybe that's the best strategy so that's an example of a greedy strategy for a particular example. But just to give you a slightly better definition of greedy than what I've said so far, a greedy algorithm is a myopic algorithm that does two things it produces. I should say I guess it processes the the input one piece at a time with no apparent look ahead. So that's what happens is that greedy algorithms are typically quite efficient.

What you end up doing is looking at a small part of the problem instance and deciding what to do. Once you've done that then you're in a situation where the problem has gone a little bit simpler because you've already solved part of it and then you move on. So what what a template then for a greedy algorithm look like for interval scheduling problem. Here is a template that probably puts it all together and gives you a good sense of what I mean by by greedy at least in this context. So step one. Use a simple rule to select a request and once you do that, if you selected a particular request let's say you selected one.

What happens now that you've selected one. Well, you're you're done you can't select to you can't select three you can't select four or five or six. So if if you have selected one in this case you're done but we have to codify that in in a step here. And what that means is that we have to reject all requests that are incompatible with I. And at this point because we've rejected a bunch of requests our problem got smaller. And so now you have a smaller problem and you just repeat go back to step one until all requests are processed.

All right, so that's a classical template for a greedy algorithm, you just go through these really simple steps and the reason this is a template is because I haven't specified a particular rule. And so it's not quite an algorithm that you can code yet because we need a rule. So with all of that context let me ask you then what is a rule that you think would work well for an interval scheduling problem. Okay, hopefully you're having some ideas. So let's start out trying one with the shortest time. Okay, so shortest time in this case might be the four interval, the shortest time might be four.

And hey, you know that that might work in this case because you pick this one which is the shortest maybe it's five which is the shortest either way, you could get four five and six looking at this picture seems to work. Maybe, you know, maybe four five and six if you pick the first five, etc. Right. So take that same algorithm and give me a counter example. Here's one that actually might work right for each request find the number of incompatible requests. So you've got a request you can always intersect the other requests with it and decide whether the second request is compatible or not.

So you do this for every other request and then you can collect together numbers associated with how many incompatible requests a particular request has. And you say, well let me use that as a heuristic so each request find the number of incompatible requests and select one with the minimum incompatibilities. So just to be clear in this case you would you would not select one because clearly one is incompatible with every other request so that is that's clearly not a numeric order. So you think this is going to produce the correct answer the maximum answer in every possible case. Think about that do you do you think that anybody is saying no should should give me a counter example. Maybe you're thinking that if you know if the one that it selects has mutually incompatible collections of intervals with which it's compatible.

Yeah, that's interesting. So here's an example where where I have something it's a little more complicated. And you can see this is a pretty good heuristic it's it's not perfect as you can see from this example where I, where I have something like this. So if you if you look at this, what I have here is I have just a bunch of requests which have clearly a lot of incompatibilities, which is the minimum well I've, I've called it outright the the one in the middle, let's say. So what happens if you select that well clearly you don't get the solution on the, the top right which is optimal, the one on the top so so that middle would be a bad selection, and this doesn't work okay so there you go. Now the question to my, my, I'm sorry the answer to my question of which rule works well for an interval scheduling problem is to select the one with the earliest finish time.

So earliest finish time is a heuristic that, well I guess it's not really heuristic in the sense that if that if you use the selection rule then it works in every case. In every case it's it's going to get you the maximum number okay earliest finish time so so what does that mean well it just means that I'm going to scan the f of eyes associated with the list of requests that I have, and I'm going to pick the one that is the minimum minimum of minimum f of eye means earliest finish time. Now I'm going to apply the selection rule associated with earliest finish time to some of our diagrams and you'll see that it works and gets you the maximum number. For example, this interval with arrow has the earliest finish time. So if you pick that and then you use the greedy algorithm step two to do to eliminate all of the intervals that are incompatible. Right so these ones go away then.

And then once those go away. This one has the earliest finish time and so forth right so this is something we can prove through examples. And, and this is where I guess the first half of lectures comes into play, we will have to prove beyond a shadow of a doubt using mathematical rigor that the earliest finish time selection rule always gives us the maximum number of requests. So that it's going to take us a little bit of time, but that's the kind of thing you'll be expected to do and you'll see a lot of incoming lecture. Okay, so hopefully everyone buys earliest finish time. So let's prove this so given a list of intervals L our greedy algorithm with earliest finish time produces K star intervals where K star is maximum so that's what we'd like to prove.

So we're going to do to prove we're going to we're going to do this by induction, and it's going to be induction on K star. And so the base case is almost, almost always with induction proofs trivial, and it's similar here as well. And in the base case if you have a single interval in your list then obviously that's a trivial example. But what I'm saying here for the base case is slightly different it says that the optimal solution has a single integral right. And so now if your problem has one interval or two intervals or three intervals you can always pick one, and it's clearly going to be a valid schedule because you don't have to check compatibility. And so the base case is trivial, even in the case where you're not just taking to, you know, the intervals that have cardinality one, but the optimal schedule has cardinality one.

So that's a trivial case so the hard work, the hard work of course in the induction proof is assuming the hypothesis and proving the n plus one or in this case the K plus one, the K star, I should say plus one case. And that's what we'll have to work on. So let's say that the claim holds for K star, and we're given a list of intervals whose optimal solution is K star plus one. It has K star plus one intervals in the optimal schedule. So L may be some large number capital L, maybe in the hundreds and K star there may be 10 of, you know, what what have you there they're different. I do want to point that out.

So our optimal schedule we're going to write this out. This, we're going to write this out as this s star. So if you use star for optimal in this class, and it's got K star plus one entries, and those entries look like SF pairs. So I'm going to, I'm going to be using the subscript J one through J K star plus one to denote these intervals. So one is SJ one FJ one. That's an interval that's been selected and is part of our optimal solution.

And then you keep going and we have SJ K star plus one comma FJ K star plus one. So no getting away from from subscripts here so that's that's what we have in terms of this is what the optimal schedule is it's got size. Of course, what we have to show is that greedy algorithm with is that the greedy algorithm with the earliest finish time is going to produce something that is K star plus one in size. And so that's the hard part we can assume the inductive hypothesis and we'll have to do that, but there's a couple of steps in between. So let's say that what we have is s one through K. It is what the greedy algorithm produces with the earliest finish time.

So I'm going to write that down as s I K F I K so notice I have K here and K and K star at this point are not comparable I'm just making a statement that I took this particular problem that has K star plus one in terms of its optimal size. And for that problem I have K intervals that are produced by the earliest finish time greedy heuristic. And so that's why the subscripts here are different I have I one here and JK, and then on the slide before I have Jays. I'm sorry I have I one and I K, and then on the slide before I have Jays. So these intervals are different. And if I look at f of I plus f of I one and if I look at f of J one what can I say about f of I one and f of J one is there a relationship between f of I one and f of J one.

What does mean? Is of X of I zero to APB, so do they have to be equal, do they have to be equal. which shown here right there there, they're less than or equal to. It's possible that you might end up with a different optimal solution that doesn't use the earliest finish time, we think earliest finish time is optimal at this point we haven't proven it yet, but it's, it's quite possible that you might have other solutions that are optimal that That's really why the less than or equal to is important here. Now what I'm gonna do is create a schedule S star star that essentially is going to be taking S star and pulling out the first interval from S star and substituting it with the first interval from my greedy algorithms schedule. So I'm just gonna replace that. And so S star star is S I one F I one.

And then I'm going to be back to S J two F J two because I'm gonna be back to S star and all the other ones are coming from S star. So they're gonna be S J K star plus one comma F J K star plus one. So I just had a little substitution there associated with the first, I guess, just with the optimal solution. And I stuck in part of the greedy algorithm solution. In fact, the very first schedule from previous slide. So we've got a couple of things to do, a couple of observations to make and we're gonna be able to prove some relationship between K and K star.

That's going to give us the proof for our claim. So clearly S star is also optimal and all I've done is taken one interval out and replaced it with another one. It hasn't changed the size. It goes up to K star plus one. So S double star is also optimal. S star is optimal.

S double star is optimal. Now I'm gonna define L prime as the set of intervals with S of I greater than or equal to F of I one. Now what is L prime? Well, L prime is what happens in the second step of the greedy algorithm where in the second step of the greedy algorithm, once I've selected this particular interval and I've pulled it in, I have to reject all the other intervals that are incompatible with this one. So I'm gonna have to take only those intervals for which S of I is greater than or equal to F of I one because those are the ones that are compatible. So that's what L prime is.

And I'm gonna be able to say that since S double star is optimal for L, S double star two to K star plus one is optimal for L prime. So I'm making a statement about this optimal solution. I know that's optimal. Basically what I'm saying is subsets of the optimal solution are gonna have to be optimal because if that's not the case, I could always substitute something better and shrink the size of K star plus one optimal solution, which obviously would be a contradiction, right? So S double star is optimal for L and therefore S double star two through K star plus one is optimal for L prime. Hopefully everybody buys that.

And so what this means of course, is that the optimal schedule for L prime has K star size. And I'm starting with two. I've taken away one. So now I have L prime, which is a smaller problem. Now hopefully you see where this proof is headed if you didn't already. I have a smaller problem, which is L prime.

Clearly it's got fewer requests. And I have constructed an optimal schedule for that problem by pulling it out of the original optimal schedule I was given. And the size of that optimal schedule is K star. And now I get to invoke my inductive hypothesis because my inductive hypothesis says that this claim that we had holds for any set of problem that have an optimal schedule of size K star. That's what the inductive hypothesis gives me. And so by the inductive hypothesis, when I run the greedy algorithm on L prime, I'm gonna get S K schedule of size K star.

Now, can you tell me, based on what you see on this slide, by construction, when I run the greedy algorithm, what am I getting on L prime? When I run the greedy algorithm on L prime, what do I get? You get S of I sub two, S of I sub two interval. Remember, the greedy algorithm picked S I one, F I one, and then rejected all requests that are incompatible and moved on. So when you rejected all requests that are incompatible here, you got exactly L prime. And by construction, the greedy algorithm should have given me all the way from S I two to S I K.

So by construction, the greedy on L prime gives S two to K. And what is the size of this? Two to the K, two K, I should say, gives me a size of K minus one. So this is K minus one. So if I put these two things together, what is the next step? I have the inductive hypothesis giving me a fact.

I have the construction giving me something. Now I can relate K and K star. What's the relationship? K star is equal to K minus one, right? Do people see that? So size K star or just K minus one.

So what this means is given that S two K is a size K star, it means that S one K is of size K star plus one, which is exactly what we want, right? That's optimal because I said in the beginning that we had K star plus one in our inductive hypothesis, this case as being the optimal solution. So our last step here is all you need to argue now that S of one K going back up here, this is optimal because K equals K star plus one, okay? There you go. So that's the kind of argument that you have to make in order to prove something like this. And what you might see in your problem sets is that different problems that you have to prove for greedy algorithms, you might run into stuff like this.

I forget exactly what technique you'll have to use there, perhaps induction, perhaps contradiction. And these are the kinds of things that get you to the point where you've analyzed the correctness of algorithms, excuse me, not just the fact that you're getting a valid schedule, but you're getting a maximum valid schedule in terms of the maximum number of requests. So that was greedy for a particular problem. I told you that the theme of our lecture here was changing the problem and getting different algorithms that had different complexities. So let's go ahead and do that. So the rest of this lecture, we'll just take a look at different kinds of problems and talk a little more superficially about what the complexities are.

And so one thing that might come to mind here, okay, one thing that might come to mind is that you'd like to do weighted interval scheduling. And what happens here is each request has weight, WI. And what we want to do is schedule a subset of requests with maximum weight. So previously it was just all weights were one, so maximum cardinality was what we wanted. But now what we want to schedule, we wanna schedule a subset of requests with maximum weight. So how does this work?

So it turns out that the greedy strategy, the template that I had fails. There's nothing that exists on this planet, at least that I know of, where you can have a simple rule and use that template to get the optimal solution, in this case, maximum weight solution. For every problem instance, so that template just fails. What other programming paradigm do you think would be useful here? I want to use dynamic programming and the dynamic programming, the name of the game, is to figure out what the sub-problems are. We learned about this, hopefully you remember.

The sub-problems are kind of gonna look like a collection of requests. I mean, there's no two things about it. They're gonna be a collection of requests. And so the challenge here is not going, is not to go to raise to the end, because to raise to the end is bad if you want efficiency. So we have to have a polynomial number of sub-problems. So one idea, you're looking at every pair of i's and j's, and well, I guess not all of them are gonna be valid.

There won't be intervals associated with that, but that's a reasonable start. The fact of the matter is that there's going to be many different possible algorithms that are all dynamic programming for this weighted problem. So let's do a simple one. And the key is to define the sub-problems, and then once you do that, the actual recursion ends up being fairly straightforward and an intuitive step. So let's look at the dynamic programming, and one particular way of solving this, using the dynamic programming paradigm. So what I'm gonna do is define sub-problems Rx.

So R is the total number of requests that we have, and the sub-problems are going to correspond to, I'm gonna request j belonging to R, such that sj is greater than or equal to x. So what I'm doing here is given a particular x, I can always shrink the number of requests that I have based on this rule. And then you might ask, what is x? And now you can apply the same sub-setting property by choosing the x's to be the finishing times of all other requests. All right, so x equals f of i. So what this means is then I put f of i in the x-spot in my first line on the screen.

It means all of the requests that come after the i's request finished are part of R of fi. So R of fi would simply be requests later than f of i. And there's something subtle here that I wanna point out, which is R of fi is not the set of requests that are compatible with the i's request. It's not exactly that. It's the set of requests that are later than f of i. So keep that in mind, because what happens here is we're gonna solve this problem step by step.

We're gonna, we're going to construct the dynamic programming solution essentially by picking a request, just like in the greedy case, and then taking the request that comes after that. So we're going to pick an early request, and then we're going to subset the solution, pick the next one, just like we did with the greedy. So the sub problem that we will actually solve potentially bottom up if we're doing recursion, they're gonna correspond to a set of requests that come later than the particular subset that we're looking at, which is defined by a particular interval. So the requests that are later than f of i, not necessarily all of the requests that are compatible with the i's request. And so if you do that, then the number of sub problems here are small n, where n is the number of requests. So if n is the number of requests in the original problem, the number of sub problems equals n, because all I do is plug in the appropriate i, find f of i for it, and generate the r of f of i for each of those.

So there's gonna be n of those sub problems, and we're gonna solve each sub problem once, and then memoize. And so the work that we have to do is the basic rule corresponding to the complexity of a dynamic program, which is the number of sub problems the time to solve each sub problem or a single sub problem. And this assumes order one for lookups. So you can think of it the recursive call as being order one because you're assuming you're doing memoization. So we've just defined what our sub problems are for our particular dynamic program. And we argued that the number of sub problems that are associated with this particular choice of sub problems corresponds to n, if you have n requests in the original problem instance that you're given.

So the last thing we have to do here to solve our dynamic program is of course to write our recursion and to convince ourselves that it's actually, that it all works out. So we're gonna do that. And so here, what we have here is our dynamic program guessing. And we're gonna try each request I as a plausible first request. And so that's where this works. You might be thinking, boy, I mean, this R of F I looks a little strange.

Why doesn't it include all of the requests that are compatible with the I request? I mean, I'm somehow shrinking my subsequent problem if I'm ignoring some requests that are earlier that really should be a part of, or are part of the compatible set, but they're not part of the R of F I set. And so some of you may be thinking that, well, the reason this is gonna work out is because we're going to construct our solution, as I said before, from the beginning to the end. So we're gonna try each request as a plausible first request. So even though this request might be in our chart all the way to the right, it might have a huge weight. And so I'm gonna have to try that out as my first selection.

And when I try that as my first selection, then the definition of my sub-problems says that this will work. I will only have to look at the request that comes later than that, because the ones that came earlier, I've tried them too. And so that's something you need to keep in mind in order to argue correctness of this recursion that I'm gonna write out now. And so the recursion, and I have opt R, which is the first thing that I'm going to have on the right-hand side. I guess let me ask you, what is the first thing that I'm gonna have on the right-hand side of this recursive formulation? What mathematical construct am I gonna have to do here?

And you see something like guessing and seeing something like each request as a possible first, then what are we gonna use? We're gonna use max, right? So I'm gonna have max one less than equal to i, less than equal to n. And then we have wi plus the optimal rfi. So that's it. You try every request as a possible first.

Obviously you pick the request, so it's part of your weight in terms of the weight for your solution. When you do that, because it was the first request, you get to prune the set of requests that come later corresponding to rfi that you see here. And then you go ahead and simply find the optimum for a smaller problem, clearly has fewer requests. And as long as you maximize over the set of requests that you've taken, and there's n guesses up at the top level, obviously in the lower levels, you're gonna have fewer requests in your rfi's, and you'll have fewer durations of the max, but it's n at the top level. So one last question, what is the complexity of what we see here? Think about that. n squared, right?

And the reason it's n squared is you simply use, you can be really mechanical about this if you say, if this was order one, I'm doing max over n items, and therefore that's over order n, time to solve one sub problem. And since I have n sub problems, I get n times order n, which is order n squared. So the last thing I'll do is give you a sense of a very small change to interval scheduling that puts us in the NP complete domain. So so far we've just done two problems, there's many other. We did interval scheduling, there was greedy linear time. Way to interval scheduling is order n square according to this particular dynamic program formulation.

It turns out there's a smarter dynamic program formulation that runs in order n log n time, but it's still polynomial time. So let's make one reasonable change to this, which is to say that we may have multiple resources, and they may not be identical. So it turns out everything that we've done kind of extrapolates very well to identical machines, even though there's many identical machines. But if you have non identical machines, what that means is you have resources or machines that have different types. So maybe your machines are T one to T M, and essentially a situation, it's essentially a situation where you say, this particular task can only be run on this machine or this other machine, some subset of machines. So you can still have a weight of one for all requests, but you have something like A of I belonging to subset of T is a set of machines that I runs on.

Okay, that's it. That's the change that we, that I made. Q of I is going to be specified for each of the Is. So you could even have two machines, and then you could say, here's a set of requests that could run on both machines. Here's a set that only runs on the first machine, and here's another set that runs on the second machine. There's a simple example of this generalization.

If you do this, the problem that has, the problem has been shown to be NP complete. And by that, I mean NP complete problems are decision problems. And so you say, can some specific number K less than N requests be N, sorry, K less than N requests be scheduled. This decision problem is NP complete. And so what happens when you have NP complete problems? Well, we're going to have a little module in the course that deals with intractability.

And we're going to look at cases where we could apply approximation algorithms, and maybe in the case of the optimization problem, if the optimum for this is K star, I'll say that we can get within 10% of K star. The other way is to just deal with intractability by hoping that your exponential time algorithm runs in a reasonable amount of time for common cases. So in the worst case, you might end up taking a long time, but if you sort of just back off after an hour and take what you get from the operative algorithm, you can do that, right? But in many cases, the algorithm might actually complete and they give you the optimum solution. So let's be done with interval scheduling topic, and I will see you guys next time.