Okay. Okay. Welcome back to 381 and our dynamic programming quadruple of lectures here. We're over halfway through into lecture three of four. Today we're going to follow up on this idea of problem constraints and expansion that was mentioned, especially towards the end of last lecture. We saw an example of sub problem expansion by a factor of two in the two player game with coins where we wanted to have two versions of the game, one where I go first and one where you go first. So this was expanding the number of sub problems by a factor of two. Today we'll see a bunch more examples of this idea, including in one setting we've seen already, which is Bellman forward, which you can think of as dynamic programming. Maybe it's a good time to mention that Bellman invented dynamic programming in the 50s, same Bellman in the Bellman forward algorithm. This was actually an independent discovery by he invented dynamic programming and then a few years later he applied it to solve the single source shortest path problem. We saw them in the other order in this class. We saw single source shortest paths first because it was a little easier. And now we're seeing the general framework that this fits into. So we'll see how that works. Why did Bellman call dynamic programming dynamic programming? Mostly because it sounded cool. He was trying to impress government agencies, giving him grants. I mean, that's that's pretty cool sounding dynamic programming here. But there is some logic to it. Programming is a reference to an old form of this word, which means optimization. And generally, we're trying to optimize things. And instead of optimizing according to some static kind of approach or program, we're doing it dynamically. This is a reference to the local brute force. We're trying to optimize at each stage. You can tell or you can't tell at the top what you're going to do in the middle. And so it's kind of each sub problem is behaving differently. And so in that sense, dynamic. And it sounds cool, right? Then we'll go to all pairs shortest paths. We'll see a new algorithm for that that's not asymptotically any better. But it's it's nice and simple on another way to a cool way to see sub problem expansion. I should definitely say, Floyd Warshall, that is a little typo there. And then we'll look at a couple of sort of practical problems, parenthizing, parenthizing, arithmetic expressions and a real world problem, piano fingering, guitar fingering, if for those that play instruments. So we're going to look at assigning a fingering schedule of how to play a piece. And we're going to do that with our sort bot framework that we learned about quick recollection of what that is. We define sub problems. And we saw how to do that for sequences, we either try prefixes, suffixes or substrings, we prefer prefixes or suffixes, because there's fewer of them. If there's more than one sequence, we take the product of those spaces. And and then the idea we're going to stress today is we can always add sub problems to make the next step easier, in particular, adding constraints to sub problems. In some sense, let's us remember things about the sub problem that's that's calling us or or about the past is one way to think about it, or in general, just to remember state, I don't know if you've heard that. Just by adding more sub problems, we can remember more stuff, not not just what things we're working on, but some context. And that's that's what we'll see lots of examples of today, it will hopefully make sense by the end of lecture. And then we need to relate these sub problems with the recurrence relation. Actually, we just call it a relation. And the key idea here is to come up with with a question that if you knew the answer to that question, you could reduce the sub problem you're trying to solve to smaller sub problem solutions, the question is sort of the fundamental aspect of some fundamental aspect of a solution. Typically, when you're dealing with suffixes, you want to ask some question about the first item, S of I, when you're dealing with prefixes, you want to ask a question about some near the last item, S of I minus one. And for substrings, who knows, somewhere in the middle, we'll see an example of that today. Once you have identified such a question, the dynamic programming approach is don't be don't be smart about how to answer that question, just locally brute force, try all possible answers to the question for each one recurse, take the best solution, according to whatever metric you're trying to do, typically minimization or maximization. Another way to think of this local brute force, which I like to think in my head. So maybe some some people like this, some people don't is to think about guessing answers to the question. So maybe the answer could be zero, one or two. And my algorithm will say, guess, which is the right answer. And I'll assume that my algorithm correctly guesses that answer and analyze that. So we can think of the program is going straight through guessing the answer and then recursing, and then combining the solutions. But then at the end, of course, we can't assume that the answer that the guess I should say was correct. In fact, we have to loop over all those guesses. So it's the same thing. Just if you think about it this way, there's less looping in your program. But when you analyze it, definitely, the loop is is really there. You have to pay for all possible answers. Okay, then we need to make sure this relation is a cyclic, get a get a sub problem, DAG. And I like to specify an explicit topological order to make that clear. We have base cases for the relation, we have to solve the original problem in terms of these sub problems. And then we analyze the running time usually as the number of sub problems times the non recursive work in the relation. So so recursion is free because we're multiplying by the number of sub problems, you can also sum over the number of sub problems. Sometimes it sometimes that gives you a tighter bound. And then of course, we also have to add on the running time we spend in the original problem. Alright, so that was a quick recap there. Now one problem we saw in this framework two lectures ago, the first lecture was single source shortest pass in a DAG, which a lot of dynamic programs actually can be reduced to a single source shortest pass in a DAG. In fact, the the reverse is true single source shortest pass in a DAG can be be thought of. The DAG relaxation algorithm we saw is essentially a dynamic program where the sub problems are delta of SV, the relation of delta SV is the min. So what are we thinking about here? We're guessing this sort of a new phrase I want to add. Actually, I think I wrote it maybe somewhere. The last edge UV on the shortest path, S to V path. That's a delta of SV, the problem we're trying to solve is find the shortest S to V path. And it's some path, and we don't know what it looks like. But some feature of the solution of this path we're trying to find is, well, what's the last edge? It comes from some vertex here unless the path is of length zero and equals no, and S equals V. That's a special case dealt with in the base case. Otherwise, there's some vertex you before V. We don't know what it is. So we're going to locally brute force, or guess what the right answer is. So look at all coming edges from U to V, and for each of them, take the recursive shortest path from S to U plus the weight of the edge. So this is the guessing or local brute force perspective. And the reason this works is because G is a cyclic. So it has a topological order. Otherwise, if the graph has a cycle, and that's the case we want to get to next, this recursive call from delta of S V to delta of S U will have loops in it. And so you'll never evaluate this recursion. You'll never finish. You'll never minimize. You'll be sad, right? It takes it takes infinite time. So don't use this algorithm unless you have a DAG. For DAGs, it's great. It's linear time. So little review there. Now here is a single source shortest paths in general graphs, which we know as Bellman Ford, but rephrased in our sort bot framework. So we defined our problem in the Bellman Ford lecture, Delta sub K of S V. Remember that was the weight of the shortest path from S to V that is restricted to use at most K edges. This made the problem feasible. We ended up taking the product of the graph into all of those different sub problems. In fact, but from the perspective of dynamic programming, we think of this as a sub problem constraint. Now, what we really want is the shortest S to V path, but that's hard. So we're going to break it up into smaller pieces for each K between zero and V. We're going to say, Well, let's think about this problem we stricted to at most K edges. And for simple paths, if there are no negative weight cycles, we only have to go up to V minus one. We proved that. And we know, then we're happy. But that's sort of the last thing we want to solve. So if we look down at the original problem we want, it's Delta sub V minus one of S V for all V. So if we could solve these sub problems, as we saw with Bellman Ford, we can solve the original problem unless there are negative weight cycles. And we use Delta sub V of S V to check whether they're negative weight cycles. I don't want to repeat that, right? But but that's the that's all in the original problem. And then we can take this relation that we wrote for dag shortest pass and just port it over here. So remember, for a general graph, we have cycles so we can't use it because we're just referring because we're just referring to an arbitrary Delta of S V S. So there's there's no reason to expect no cycles there. But now here I'm running the exact same formula for this min, but I added a sub K and a sub K minus one here, the observation being if I've already guessed what the last edge UV is for this path, then if the whole thing has length at most K, then a smaller path piece has length at most K minus one. So I only need to solve Delta sub K minus one of SU. There's one other thing, which is as I mentioned a little bit ago, it could be that we use fewer than K edges. And so let's consider the case where we don't follow the last edge, and we just add this min, the shortest path using at most K minus one edges. That's option. That's one option for having at most K edges. If we wrote equality here, then we would we would remove that like the last problem section. Okay. The key observation here is that this recurrence does not have cycles just by adding that index. If we solve these problems in order of increasing K, all of the references from Delta sub K in terms of Delta K minus one. And so now magically, this is this is now acyclic. This is why Bellman forward worked. But now I think in a very pleasing way, we're taking our graph acyclic, and by spreading it out over various copies of K and referencing always the smaller one, we get an acyclic graph acyclic relations, we have base cases like normal. And then we can analyze the running time in the usual way, which is summing how much does this cost, we're going to take the cost of computing the relation, which is the the number of incoming edges to be that's this that's our theta here. Here we are. That's that's our theta. And so we're summing over K and summing over V. And here we wrote as a sum instead of a product because this thing is theta E, the sum of incoming edges over all vertices is exactly the size of E. And then we sum there there's no K in this formula. So we just multiply by V and we get E. So our good old friend Bellman forward recast kind of the opposite way. Before we were using relaxations. Now we're just writing them in explicitly. But essentially the same computation just in a different order. Okay, cool. So so these are reviews of old algorithms, but in this new framework to show how how powerful it is. Let's look at another example, which is our friend all pair shortest past a few lectures ago, we saw Johnson's algorithm, which solves this very well. So one option we could use is just the same set of sub problems. But for all you and you V for UNV and V that's that's what we really cared about. Then we could say K up to V something like that. So so this would work but it would really give the same running time as Bellman forward V times. This is one solution we know but it's not the best solution we know for how to solve shortest past. This would give V squared E which is at most V to the fourth for dense graphs. This is theta V to the fourth. So this is V times V times V. But worst case, it's V to the fourth. What I would like to show you now is a different way to solve this problem, almost identical, but it gives V cubed running time, which for dense graphs is pretty good. So we're going to reduce our four down to a three. And this is an algorithm called Floyd Marshall. It's definitely not an obvious algorithm. It's a very cool idea and it's a nice example of a different way. Remember this this sub problem expansion, we took the problems we cared about multiplied by this choice of K. Here we're going to do the same thing, but define it differently. We're going to define those sub problems differently. First, I want the number of vertices starting at one for convenience. So so we've got y. And then we're going to define some sub problems, which are d u v comma K. This is just a definition local to this algorithm. So I want the weight of shortest s to v path so far, just the same as as the problem we actually want to solve. But I'm going to add a constraint, which is using only vertices in u v and one up to K. This is the divine inspiration to define sub problems this way. It's a different constraint than the one we saw in the Bellman Ford slide a few minutes ago, which was using at most K edges. So in some sense, what's slow about that algorithm is that we have to loop over all the incoming vertices. That's expensive costs order the degree, which ends up with an e term, we're going to try to convert that e term into a v term by just knowing which vertex to to come from, which sounds impossible. But it turns out if you write the sub problems this way. So so I'm naming the vertices and say, well, let me just find a path that uses u v and label the vertex and the vertex labeled the vertex labeled one. There's, there's only like two options, right? I could go straight from you to V, or I could go from you to K, I'm sorry, what do I say? Okay, there's a K, right? Anyway, so I could go straight from you to V, or I could go from you to K to V. And then how about with one and two and one, two and three. So same anyway, if you just relabel, you can use letters, numbers, whatever. We can label them instead of counting them. So it's a slight tweak, but it turns out it does speed up the algorithm. This is v cubed sub problem, sub problems. I have v choices for you v choices for v and v choices for K, roughly here, v cubed of these. But the key thing is that that sounds like a lot, but the relation becomes cheaper now, because I can just write delta d of u v K is the min of two things d of u v K minus one and d of u K K minus one plus d of K v K minus one. It's a strange formula because we're using indices like K for vertices also, as well as you and V for vertices, but we're also using K as a counter. But we can do this because our vertices are numbered. Okay. So the idea is the following, we have we have vertex u, we have a vertex v, and we've already found the shortest path that uses vertices one through K minus one. That's what our quantity is. So it could be, and now we're trying to add in this vertex K, and think about what are all the paths that could go from from you to V using one up to K. Well, it could be the shortest path from you to V using one up to K doesn't use vertex K. That's our first option. Okay. Just use vertices one up to K minus one, maybe we don't need to use K, or it could be that the path goes through K. Well, it starts at you, and it goes to K. And then it goes from K to V, all using for simple paths. If we assume there are no negative weight cycles, and you have to run about and forward to detect them. But assuming no negative weight cycles, the shortest path from you to V through K must start by using vertices less than K, and then use vertices less than K again. And that's what I've written here on the slide. It's it's from you to K using K minus one up to K minus one labels, and from K to V using labels up to K minus one. The cool thing here is the men only has two terms. So this takes constant time non recursive work. So this is K. So yeah, so not on the shortest path. And then we have K is on the shortest path. So this is constant non recursive work. Okay. And if we jump ahead to the running time for this algorithm, we get the number of sub problems, which is V cubed times the amount of work per sub problem, which is constant. So that's just a V cubed algorithm. And like I said, for dense graphs, this is pretty good. When E is V squared, then this is the same time this or this is the same thing as V times E. So it's as good as Bellman Ford. It's not as good as Johnson for sparse graphs, sparse graphs, remember, or in general with Johnson, we got V squared log N plus V. And this is always spending V Q. But it's cool, because it's a very simple algorithm. Okay, let's quickly look at topological order next. All we need to guarantee all we need is to to guarantee that we solve problems in the increasing K order, because every reference here is to a smaller K for the third argument. And so for example, you can just write a triply nested loop k equals zero one up to V and and you and V and V and V. So if you wanted to write this algorithm bottom up, you would just write a triple, a triple for loop and then plug in this recurrence relation here, and think of D as a table as a as a set mapping in set instead of as a function call. Yeah, and boom, so four lines, you've got your algorithm, except you also need a base case. The base case here is UV zero. So I've defined what that means. But when K equals zero, the one through K set is empty. So all I'm allowed to use are my vertices, you and V. These Okay, so there are three cases for this zero if you equals V. It's W of UV if there's an edge from you to V, and it's infinity otherwise. Okay, but easy base case constant time for each. And then the original problems we want to solve our delta UV size of V, because I remember the vertices I go, I go through size of V. Yeah, and if K equals size of V, that means I get to use all my vertices. So that's regular shortest pass. This is assuming no negative weight cycles, we already know how to do negative weight cycle detection. So I'm not going to talk about that again. But then this will be my shortest pathway because, yeah, I implicitly assumed here that my path was simple, because I imagined that I only use K once zero or one time. And that's true if there are no negative weight cycles. And we already did the part of sort box. So V cubed algorithm, very simple, basically five lines of code, and you've got all pairs shortest pass. And if your graph is dense, again, pretty good, pretty good running time. If your graph is not dense, you should use Johnson like we might have a problem set on that we'll see. So this is an example of sub problem expansion, a very non intuitive one, where we use some prefix of the vertices but notice it's prefixes again, a number of the vertices from one up to V. And I took a prefix of those vertices. So I just solved the problem using prefix vertices one through K. So it's actually a familiar idea. If you had seen, if all you have seen are our all dynamic programming examples of prefixes, sub fixes, substrings, actually, it's, it's pretty normal to solve shortest pass this way, maybe even maybe even more normal. Anyways, all right, so enough shortest pass, let's solve two more problems that are in our standard wheelhouse that will involve sequence of inputs and not graphs here. Okay, so first we have arithmetic parenthesization, parenthesization. Okay, we are given a formula with say, plus and times. Let me give you an example here, we've got seven plus four times three plus five. Now, when you read this, because you've all been well trained, you think, okay, I'm going to multiply. I'm going to, I'm going to multiply four and three first because that has a higher precedence, then I'll add up the results. But what I'm going to let you do is parenthesize this expression however you want. For example, you can add parentheses here and here. And each one evaluates to something here we have 11 and eight. So this would be 88. And my goal is to maximize that computation. And I claim that this shown on screen is the way to maximize this particular example. So given a formula, a zero star one a one star two a two and so on up to star and minus one a and minus one where AI is an integer, as we like in this class, and each star I is either plus or times. Okay, so I'm using star as a generic operator here. So you're given some formula, any mixture of plus and multiplication or times that you like involving n integers. And your goal is to place parentheses to maximize the result. So you can try all of the combinations here. I, for example, take the product of four times three, I get 12. And if I do that first, I get 12. Then if I add five and seven, I get 24, which is less than 88. And checking them all, this one is the maximum for that example. So interesting problem, again, bit of a toy problem, but it's motivated by lots of actual problems. To apply this framework, we need to identify some sub problems. This is a sequence problem. We're given a sequence of symbols. And so the natural thing is to try prefixes suffixes or sub strings. I'm going to jump ahead and think about the the relation first, I want to identify some question about a sub problem or its solution that would let me reduce to a smaller sub problem, or sub problems. This is a little trickier. This is very different. We're not always doing something on the left or on the right. Or we can't assume there's something happening on the left, because maybe we take a product in the middle first. If I take a product in the middle first, then I have some result here. But I still have three other things. I have the thing to the left, I have the thing in the middle, and I have the thing on the right. It turns out to be very messy to think about what the first operation is. Because we can think of this as a treat where we take a product here, we take a sum of seven and four and three and five, and then take the product as the root. But I don't know what the tree is, right? I only know these numbers and these operators. But I don't know how to organize the tree. The idea is if you think of this tree, what is one thing that's easy to identify? Just looking at it. It's the root, right? The root corresponds to the last operation I do in this computation. The last thing I did was take a product. And that's a lot easier, because if I guess who's at the root, which operator is at the root, that naturally decomposes into the left subtree and the right subtree. And those will always be substrings. We kind of know this. The left node corresponds to everything left of the operator. And the right substring of this subtree corresponds to everything to the right of the operator. So this is our idea. We're going to guess which operation star I is evaluated last, or in other words, at the root. So this is the question. It has n possible answers. I guess actually n minus one from operator n minus one. And so we'll just brute force all those choices. I wanted to start here because to realize that if I choose some star I in the middle, which might be the right thing, like in this example, star I is the middle one middle operator, I naturally decompose into everything to the left of that operator and everything to the right of that operator. The left side is a prefix, the right side is a suffix. So our sub problems are going to be substrings. Okay, I'm not going to write the sub problems quite yet, because there's another idea we need. So what do I need to do with the substring? I'm going to guess the middle operator and then evaluate the left substring, evaluate the right substring. What am I going to do with those substrings? Okay, think about that for a sec. I guess I'm trying to solve solve this problem, which is place parentheses in order to maximize the result, and then return what the result is. And I can use those, those parent pointers to reconstruct what the parentheses actually are. Once I guess what the last operator is, it's enough to maximize the part to the right. I guess let me phrase it as a question, is it enough to maximize the part to the right and maximize the part to the left. Well that always maximize my sum or product according to what this operator is. And if you think about it for a bit, yeah, if I want to maximize the sum, I should maximize the two parts. And if I want to maximize the product, I should maximize the two parts. That seems right. Except, I didn't say that my integers are positive. That's true if your integers are positive. But to make this problem more interesting, we're going to allow the integers to be negative. For example, seven plus minus four times three plus minus five. So I just added a couple minuses to a couple numbers here. Then it's no longer the best way to to pair them this way. If I pair them this way like this, or if I add parentheses in the same place as our original problem, I get three for the left side and I get minus two for the right side. So I get the product of that is negative six, which probably is not the maximum. In fact, I can do better, I believe by doing the left operator last. Yeah. So I claim this is the best parent, parenthesization. If I remembered it correctly. This is minus two times minus four is eight plus seven is 15. So I got a positive number definitely better than the negative number I got. So I claim to you this is the best. And the key property here is when we take a product of two negative numbers, we get a positive number. Sometimes you actually want to make things small because small might mean very negative. You take two very big negative negative numbers, very small negative numbers. In other words, you take their product, you get a very big product positively because the signs cancel out. Okay, so this seems tricky. We want to work on substrings, but we don't know whether we're trying to maximize, or you might think, well, maybe I'm trying to maximize the absolute value. But that's not good. Maybe overall on it's on this entire expression, I get negative one million and that's not what I wanted. I wanted to to maximize the sum. So I still need to solve the max evaluation that I can get the max parent, this is a shame, but I also need to solve solve the men. If I can solve max and men, I'll know the entire range that I could get. And I really only, I'll care about men, especially when it lets me go negative, but let's just solve in all cases the men and the max and then just brute force the rest. So, so that was some motivation and why we're going to define sub problems this way. I'm going to define X of I, j comma opt to be opt here is either going to be men or max operation here opt. And, and this is my sub problem expansion, I really just care about max at the very end, but I'm going to care about men along the way and I j is going to specify my substring. So this is going to be the the opt value. Opt here is going to stand for optimum or optimization, the opt value I can get for the substring ai star plus one and ai plus one and so on to star j minus one a j minus one. Okay. Being careful to get my indices correct here. And, and I want zero less than or equal to I less than j less than equal to n. I claim and an opt like this. And I'm going to get the men value and the max value separately those are two different sub problems. So this is my expansion this is the constraint I'm adding. And I'm only focusing on the substring from I inclusive to j exclusive. Okay. So I claim these are good sub problems. Let's look at the rest of the recurrence relation. Whoops. So relate I want to write here X of i j. I said I j opt on the left, and I want to optimize so this will be men or max on a set of choices. What's my set of choices. Well, like I said, I want to guess what is the last operation evaluated so I wrote star I here, but star I is already defined so I'm going to use star K. So, I'm going to guess which of my operations between I plus one and j minus one is the last one. And I evaluate and that decomposes everything left of K. So that would be X of i comma K comma something. And then we will do operator star K on the part after K, which is from K to J something. I'm going to keep with me it's filled in on screen but building you up to it. And I'm choosing between. I think it's i less than K less than J K is some operator in between because I started I plus one and I ended J minus one. So those are the possible choices for K. I tried them all that's my local brute force. And then I take what I can get on the left, what I can get on the right and multiply or add them according to whether the operator is plus or time. So I'm going to do these. Now should I maximize or minimize this one though. I don't know. So I'm just going to do more local brute force. Well let's just say opt prime for the left or let's call actually opt L for the left and opt R for the right, as shown here, and I'll just add this to my for loop. So let's just try opt L and opt R just take all the possible choices among men and max. Now you could think hard and for any addition, for example, if you're maximizing, you really only need to maximize the two parts and if you're minimizing, you can prove you all all you need to minimize the two parts but for multiplication, it's messy. It could be really any of the options because sometimes when you minimize you get a negative term. Sometimes you don't. And so it depends on what you're trying to do. You have to consider all the signs. But we don't need to think too hard. We can just try all the options. There's only four options for opt L and opt R among men and max. You could do men, men, men max, max men and max max. So it's just a multiplication by four in this for loop. The big cost is actually the range constraint for IJ, no for IK, yeah, and J, because there are J minus I choices for K. There's a constant number of choices for opt L and opt R. We're not going to prove that here. But the idea is if you're trying to minimize or maximize your summer product, it's enough to know what ranges these could come in. And the optimal choice will always be an extreme in that range. I don't know. Maybe you've heard of simplex method, some things in there. But we'll consider all of them here. And so we get this recurrence. Now it needs a base case. And we need to check that it's a cyclic but topological order is just increasing J minus I. This is the usual order for substring problems because this is increasing length of the substring. So start with very tiny substrings. Here we'll start with length one substrings. We just have an AI there. So that's going to be our base case and you grow up to the entire string. And it doesn't matter how we order relative to opt as long as we're increasing in J minus I, because I to K and K to J will always be strictly smaller than I to J. So this will be a cyclic. The base case is X of I, I plus one opt. This is always AI. It doesn't matter what opt is because there's nothing, there's no choice. You just have a single number in that substring because we're exclusively on I plus one. And then the original problem we want to solve is X of zero and max. You could also solve min and see how small you can get. So if you wanted to maximize the absolute value, you could solve max problem and the min problem and take the largest of those two options. And how much time does this take? Well, how many sub problems are there for a substring problems? We have n squared sub problems. Now, we multiply the number of sub problems by two, but that's still n squared. So we have n squared sub problems. And how much work per sub problem are we doing? Well, as I mentioned, we're doing J minus I choices for K and a constant number of choices for opt L and opt R. So this is theta J minus I, which if we're being like a little sloppy kind of, that's at most big O of n. And it turns out to be the right answer anyway. So there's a linear amount of non-recursive work. In fact, it's like a triangular number, but that's still theta and cubed. Same running time as v cubed we just got, but polynomial time. And this is pretty impressive because we're really brute forcing all possible parenthesizations. Oh my gosh. There are about four to the n exponentially many of an expression, but we're finding the biggest, the one that evaluates the largest value and the one that evaluates to the smallest value in just n cubed time, polynomial, right? And a key here was sub problem expansion where we, in addition to solving the max problem, we also solve the min problem because sometimes you want to take two very small negative numbers and product them together to get a larger positive number. Okay. Cool. All right, let's go to our last example, which is piano fingering. Here we're given a sequence of notes, t0, t1, to t, for, yeah, for notes up to tn minus one, these are single notes. And we have our fingers here on our hands. This is not like our two finger algorithm. This is our five, we're using all five fingers here, five finger algorithm. And in general, I'm going to assume an arbitrary a thorough anyway, so we're saying just some object where we're not assuming necessarily humans, but this will be five for for humans. Okay. We'll solve it for an arbitrary F though. And what we would like to do is assign fingers to notes to tell our pianist which finger to use for each note. And then finally, when you're given sheet music, it just gives you a sequence of notes you want to play. It doesn't tell you which, which finger you want to play with unless you have some nice training booklets and they have a number on top of each. Maybe for those that have learned piano, maybe when you were starting out your, your piano instructor would write your, your finger numbers. I know mine. That's how I learned. And I number them one, two, three, four, five and symmetrically one, two, three, four, five right on both hands. But there's limits here right let's let's picture if I'm going from a far left note and I want to reach up to a farther right note. Maybe I have a decent span from my fourth. I'm sorry my first to my fifth finger, but the span from my first finger to my second finger is not as big I can't reach as far with my second finger so if I want to play a lower left note, and then a higher note, I would like to put a very extreme finger on the left and go to an extreme finger on the right. I'm going to formalize this problem pretty abstractly because I don't want to get into music performance per se. I'm going to say that there's a metric D for if I'm at note T with finger F, and I want to go to note T with finger F prime with finger F prime, then this function D of T F T prime F prime gives me the difficulty of doing that the difficulty of playing note T with finger F, and then playing note T prime with finger F prime. So this is a transition difficulty. I'm not going to worry about the difficulty of the whole piece other than saying, well I've got to play this note and then I've got to play this note. And for now just single notes you play a single note with your right hand, then you play another single note with your right hand, and then another single note with your right hand so let's assume no pauses for now no rests. So we have this difficulty from going from the ith note to the I plus first note. And then our goal is to minimize the sum of difficulties minimum, minimum sum of D T I F I T I plus one plus one. And these f I's and fi plus one is what we want to compute. We don't know which fingers to use we're only given which notes to play this is actually a natural problem this. There's lots of papers about this problem. But there are notes like there are constraints in this usually people write this metric as a sum of different penalty terms. If I want to minimize difficulty difficulty is high if I played a note far on the left. So if I go from a low note to a high note that's easier to do if I use the lower number finger and I go to a higher number finger. I don't want to go from a high number finger to a low number finger to play a note on the right, right that's annoying. I would like to do an assignment if I can that avoids that. So I'll just have some penalty of that like 100 if that happens zero if it doesn't happen, sum up a bunch of terms like that. So I would prefer to avoid the fourth and fifth fingers weak fingers or if I'm playing a portion of the song that is legato I don't want to use the same finger to play two notes right after the other. I've got to use two different fingers for that. So, so you have a penalty if fi equals fi plus one and these notes are not the same. So if we're we're in legato mode then we add a penalty term and things like that. I would prefer if I'm going from a very low note to a very high note I would like to use more extreme fingers things like that. But we're just going to assume this D function is given to us it's some polynomial size. If you imagine the notes on your keyboard are end notes or or M notes, then some polynomial and M size to this function. So this is the most obvious problem this this is going to use sub problem expansion. So the sub problems are going to be X of i comma F this is the minimum total difficulty to play suffix because I like suffixes. Ti up to T and minus one starting with finger F on note to Ti. The obvious sub problems would be without this constraint. So this here is a problem constraint, and you could try to define the sub problems as what's the best way to play a suffix, but I claim it's important to know which finger we start with. So we're going to multiply the number of sub problems by capital F, which is just five. So this is very, very small sub problem expansion. And then we're going to constrain these sub problems to say, well what if I started with my first finger what if I started with my second finger. What if up to up to the fifth finger try them all. So this turns out I can write a relation which is X of i f equals the men. What should I mean over. I'll just guess this I'm I already told you what my first finger is to use which finger I should use for Ti. So what's the next thing that matters well, I guess what finger to use for the ti plus one the very next note. What's the next finger I use. I'll call that f prime and minimize over f prime between one and capital F for of the remaining suffix, starting with f prime plus my difficulty function from Ti, f to Ti plus one comma f prime end of bracket. Okay, so there's kind of a lot going on here but actually if you think about what I would like to write the recurrence on while I start with the suffix I. I want to recurse on the smaller suffix so that's X of i plus one. So here if I know that I'm prioritizing my finger number for I. Well, then I'm in order to even call this function, I need to know what finger I'm using for plus plus one. Once you decide on these such sub problems it's really obvious you need to guess what is the next finger, and then recurse on that finger recurse on the remaining suffix of that finger. Why did we need to know what what these fingers were why not just guess what the first finger is well, it has to do with our difficulty function for this difficulty function I know that what I want to measure. I know that I want to measure the difficulty from ti to ti plus one and to do that because this function is parameterized by four things. I need to know both the finger for ti and at the same time the finger for ti plus one. If I remove the the F in our sub problem definition, I could add a min over one finger but I can't really add a min over two fingers. So what this does by by parameterizing parameterizing by F here and writing down the optimal for each starting finger F, I can in some sense. I'm just going to bring in this in this call what finger I started with, because I told you you have to start with finger F prime. And so locally to X if I know what finger F prime is being used for ti plus one. And so because of the definition of X if I know what finger I'm using for ti. And so I get to know both of these fingers. So one comes out of the the min and the other is given to me as this parameter in our relate step. Okay. And then of course I can solve. If I can solve these problems I can write the original problem by just one more min of one up to capital F of X zero little F here. And I don't know which finger to start with, but that's just F choices. And so then this this recurrence gives me the overall solution. And I'll just jump to the time we need a base case and topological order but it is n F squared time. So I get n times F sub problems here and for each one I'm doing an optimization over F choices. So I get n times F squared it's a polynomial. And if F is a constant this is actually linear time very fast dynamic programming. Now what I described here is for one hand, one note at a time, but you can generalize this to two hands, each with one note that lashes 10 fingers. So you could solve this separately for the right hand and left hand if you know which notes are being played with the left and right hand, but some pieces that's not obvious. So to make it more interesting what if you have multiple notes at the same time and let's say, I think it's reasonable to say that you can only play up to F notes at a time one one for each finger. And so if you have an upper bound on the number of notes at a time were that we're playing Anyway, that's good right to have that upper bound. Okay, I've got a drawing of this. Yeah. Okay. This is the original problem which is we don't know which finger to start with, but then we just have a complete bipartite graph here, where we write on each of these edges what is the difficulty of this transition. The x axis here is which fingering I'm using 12345 and the why I'm sorry, what I say the y axis is which finger I'm using one through five, and the x axis is which suffix I'm considering which note do I start on. And so you can solve this with shortest pass in a dog, or you can solve it directly as dynamic programming either top down or bottom up. Okay. Jumping ahead, if you do multiple notes at a time instead of this finger choice which just had F choices. We have t to the F possible states where T is the maximum number of notes that I could play at once. And usually this is at most F one one per finger but we could memorize and F would be number of fingers so I could deal with all 10 fingers on a typical human set of arms, hands, what hands, and say there's at most 10. And so this is 10 to the 10, it's a big constant but it's constant like 1 billion 10 billion. And that's, but then it's that times n, and maybe that squared times and will let me exhaustively enumerate all of the possible things I could be doing with all of my hands. You can apply this not only to piano fingering but also to guitar fingering like maybe rock band rock band is an easy case where you have just five buttons usually only only four fingers that you can use. So the case where F equals four, you can apply to optimally figure out which finger. Once you have a difficulty function of what transitions are easy and hard for rock band, then you can optimally figure out your fingering for rock band songs with a with a real guitar this is a little bit harder right because there's actually multiple ways to play the same note if you're familiar with with the guitar instrument. So in addition to what finger I use, I should also decide which string to play that note on. If, you know, if all I'm given a sheet music different notes to play another thing I could guess is which string to play that note on. So you have to define some difficulty function it might depend on how big your fingers are but but you can do that and then optimize using these algorithms, which is the best guitar fingering for a given piece one note at a time or several notes at a time. You can even add in parameters like, oh, maybe I want to play a bar. So you could do other things with the guitar to make it more interesting, but generalize this dynamic program suitably. Anyway, I think this gives you a flavor how with with sub problem expansion, I can capture at most any aspect of a problem that I want as long as the number of states that I need to keep track of is small I can just multiply the number of sub problems by that state. And I can keep track of any kind of transition from one state to another, which I could also do with taking the product of a graph. Dynamic but dynamic programming gives you a kind of of methodical way to think about this by figuring out some property in this case the state of how many fingers are applied to an instrument, and then just just brute forcing the rest. So very, very powerful framework here and and we'll keep talking about it next time.