Okay. You have started a screen share. Okay. Okay, perfect. Okay, good morning. Welcome to 13th lecture of, of 381. Just to recap from last time here, we've been talking about single source shortest paths on weighted graphs. Right. We've been talking about that for the past two lectures. Previously, we were only talking about unweighted graphs. And so far up until today, we've talked about three ways to solve single source shortest paths on weighted graphs. Namely, the first one we used BFS, you can kind of transform your graph into a linear sized graph that's unweighted that corresponds to your weighted problem, essentially replacing each weighted edge of weight W with W single edges, right. Now that's only good for positive weight things and if the sum of your weights are small, but if the sum of your weights is linear in the combinatorial size of your graph V plus E, then we can get a linear time algorithm to solve the weighted shortest paths using breadth first search. Then we talked about how we could, if we, the problem with weighted shortest paths is if our weights were negative and, and there could exist cycles, then we could have negative weight cycles and that would be more difficult to to handle, because then you have vertices where you have an unbounded number of edges. And so that you might have to go through for a shortest path, right. So, so you have vertices where you have an unbounded number of edges, edges that you might have to go through for that shortest path. Yeah, there, there might not be a finite length shortest path is all I'm trying to say. In addition, where we didn't have any cycles in the graph of course we couldn't have negative weight one so we were also able to do that in linear time by exploiting the fact that our vertices could be ordered in a topological order. So we kind of push the shortest path information from the furthest one back to the ones forward by by relaxing edges forward by maintaining this invariant that we had shortest paths as we were processing these things in a topological order right. In the last time we were talking about general graphs graphs that could contain cycles, and this is our most general algorithm because if there are negative weight cycles Bellman Ford, which is what we talked about last time, can detect them. So, for any particular for any vertex that had a finite weight shortest path. We could compute that shortest path for compute compute is distance. And for anyone that is reachable from a negative weight cycle, not only could we market as minus infinity distance, but we could also find a negative weight cycle essentially by by duplicating our graph to make it a dag, and be able to follow pointers in this expanded dag that has multiple layers. So that's all we've done up until now we've gotten linear time for some types of graphs and we've gotten kind of a quadratic like v v times e for general graphs ones that could contain negative cycles. So now how how bad is this well if the grass if the graph is sparse if the number of edges in our graph is on the order of v, then this is quadratic time and v v squared. But if the graph is dense where we have quadratic like like the complete graph where every edge is present, then we have quadratically many edges in our graph in v. And so this running time is the cube. V cube is not great. In terms of its running time right we would we would like something closer to linear. And so that's what we're going to do today if we have this restriction where we have non negative weights, we can have negative weight cycles. And this is a restriction that comes up a lot for for many graphs you might encounter a lot of times you don't have both positive and negative way I don't have a negative distance to my house say right in any metric we have non negative weights. So these things come up a lot and we can actually do quite a bit better since there are no negative weight cycles we can almost get linear. It's not going to be quite v plus e as as you see here up on the slide. We're going to get we're going to get something very close it's v plus plus e but on the v term we have this logarithmic factor in v, which remember for all intents and purposes. This log of that thing in real life is not going to be bigger than than like a factor of 30 maybe maybe 60, but it's a small number and so this is actually pretty good performance it's almost linear that's what I'm saying almost linear here. And that's what we're going to do. So how do we do this well I'm going to make two observations first off our ideas going to be able to generalize the notion of BFS when we had BFS we split up our graph to solve unweighted. Solve weighted shortest past in BFS, we could take our positive edge weights, break them into individual edge weights but if the total weight of our edges was large, then we'd have a problem because now we've expanded the size of our graph right. This is the same issue that we had with something like radix sort, where we don't want our algorithm to run in the size of numbers in our input. We want our algorithm to run in the number of numbers in our input. That's the difference between n and you back when we were talking about data structures here if the size of our weight are large compared to V and E then doing this expansion is going to be difficult. Oh, let's do this is going to be difficult but say if we had some graph so this this is my graph G and we have a source vertex s right. The idea here is going to still be to try to grow a frontier of increasing distance from my source and try to maintain all the things within a certain distance from my source. So that's the idea grow a sphere centered at my source repeatedly explore closer vertices before I get to further ones. But how can I explore closer vertices. If I don't know the distances beforehand that this is kind of seems like circular logic right. I'm going to use the distance to my things to compute the distances to my things that doesn't work so well right this that sounds kind of weird. So how do we do this well the idea is to gradually compute the distances can compute the distances as we go so that we maintain this property. Now this property this this idea wouldn't work necessarily in the context of negative edge weights here we have this growing frontier I've tried to show like contour lines whatever this ball around my source. And as I grow my thing these things are further and further distance because any edge from something back here as I'm growing my ball in certain distance these things are outside of that distance. We're kind of using a key observation here right so observation one. If weights greater than or equal to zero, then distances increase along shortest paths, maybe, maybe weekly monotonically increase if there are zero weight edges. But in general if I had a path going from S to some V and it's going through some vertex you, I have some shortest path this is the shortest path from S to be and it goes through some point you. Some vertex you I should say, then this monotone monotosity more specifically means that the shortest path from S to you and the shortest path from S to V. How do these relate to each other. Let's think about that. If it's along that path, then it has to be at least as large as the sub path, right, because all of these the weight of the path cannot be negative so that's the thing that Dijkstra is going to exploit. It essentially means that when I'm expanding the frontier of distance away from my ex it's possible that if I had negative weight. So I've bolded one of my contour lines here. If I had some negative weight going from a vertex to a vertex here to vertices shown in red I've tried to show in red. The vertex shown with an arrow pointing to it could be within my bolded boundary maybe if this distance is X. You know that that guy could be within X. These things, the things that are within distance X of S might not all be contained there could be a path to another vertex with distance X. It doesn't have this property because I could decrease in distance along the path so so that's our first observation. That second observation. Well, let's see if we can maybe piggyback on gag relaxation. I claim to you that we can solve single source shortest paths faster if we're given an order of vertices in increasing distance beforehand distance from S. So here's the idea. I'm not going to give you the distances to all these vertices instead I'm going to give you the order of the vertices in some increasing distance from S. Okay, so here's a rough graph here. But here's here's a graph. Okay, and and I've called vertices 0123 and 4. Okay, so maybe let's put some edge weights on I've got them in in red here. So here's a way to graph and I don't necessarily know I could use use Belman forward to find shortest paths from vertex zero. But the idea here is I'm not going to give you the shortest paths I'm going to try to compute the shortest paths. But I'm going to give you some additional information. I'm going to give you the order of the shortest path distance from the source. And I can just eyeball this and say shortest path distance to three is going to be two I'm going to say through through that edge there. So the shortest path distance, we've got another two, because I can go through both my zeros right so that's not a problem. And then we've got another shortest path distance of two, and about like a one third on our three to four right. So those are actually listed in in increasing distance from my source in my graph here. I had to compute those those deltas to convince you that that was the right ordering, but this is the right ordering of those things right now now it's not only the right order it's not the only right order but it is it is a right ordering. Okay, so I'm so I'm arguing to you that I could solve a single source shortest paths in linear time. If I were to give you the vertices in increasing distance. How could I do that. Well, because of our first observation I know that if these are in increasing distance any edge going backwards with respect to this ordering can participate in the shortest paths with one exception right. Can you think of what that exception is. I shouldn't have already I jumped the gun I'm showing my other transformed got here but um, the exception is if the weight. Is is zero right um, just like the situation from vertex three to one, then I could go backwards in the ordering see so that's that's problematic. The idea is I'm going to want to construct a DAG, so that I can run DAG relaxation. Well, if I have a component here that has zero weights, I can collapse this thing down I can deal with that component separately. So let's worry about that separately. If we do we can collapse that edge down into a single vertex and transform the graph so it does respect the ordering. In this case, you don't actually have to transform down and like in some cases you could transform and reduce like vertex one and three into a vertex together you could just say like vertex one and three in this case we didn't have to. But let's ignore zero weight edges for now. If I have a cycle right now I don't have a cycle of zero weight. So what I could do is is take that vertex that's found in my cycle and and put it after both of those other vertices. Then we can rearrange the order so so where there's a path of length zero and get a new ordering that still satisfies the property. Okay, a lot of words here. That that's always the case because paths can't increase right we already saw this past past can't. I'm sorry past can't decrease in weight. I can rearrange the ordering of these things so that three comes first. One comes second and two comes third of those three vertices. So for every set of zero edges I can just flip the relationship if they have the same distance. In my input, I'm given vertices that have the same distance from the source. And so if those are the same distance from the source and they're connected by a zero weight edge it doesn't hurt me to just flip their ordering. So I'm going to do that. So let's convert to a graph with different order. And that's what we're looking at here. Okay, so I think I brought over all the original edges from my graph. Okay, so now I have the property that every edge that could participate in the shortest path are going forward in the ordering because edges shown are our zero weight. So we flip those around so they're going to connect with respect to the ordering and any edge going backwards that's that is positive weight certainly can't be used towards the shortest path right so I just I just get rid of them. If there's a zero weight cycle I can just coalesce them down together down to a single vertex because if I reach one of them I can reach all of them. So so the idea here is is we're trying to construct a DAG I can construct this DAG in a linear time and then I can run DAG relaxation on this graph in linear time to get shortest path so that's the approach. If I knew the ordering of the vertices in increasing distance then I could use DAG relaxation. So we're going to use both of our observations this is how we're going to solve the single source shortage problem with with non negative weights using deastres. So that's finally now where we're coming to. We've got deastres algorithm here. Deastres was a Dutch computer science pretty famous he wrote a monograph on why programming languages should start with zero indexing as opposed to two one indexing so we like him. But in particular, he designed this very nice generalization of BFS for weighted graphs, and the basic idea behind deastres is the following idea. Relaxed edges from vertices in increasing distance from the source case so this is this is the kind of the same. The same kind of difficulty we had before when we were trying to generalize BFS. So how do we know what the next vertex is with increasing distance to S. Well, the second idea is to find the next vertex efficiently using a data structure. And the data structure we're going to use is something I like to call changeable priority queue. So this is a little bit different than a normal priority queue that we had at the end of our data structures unit. This changeable priority queue has has three operations we're going to we're going to say it's Q here. We can build it on an iterable set of items just stick X like like n items in there. We can delete men from the queue. Okay, so so this is the same now as the priority queue. It's this third operation that's going to be different decrease the key of an item that has ID ID. Okay, so so this is a little strange what the heck is is this ID. All right, with a change of priority queue, each of our items has has two values instead of one value. It has a key but it also on on which the priority queue is leading the men item with the minimum key. But but also each item has an ID associated with it, a unique integer. So that when we perform this operation decrease key, it can find some item in our data structure and with with with the given key. And if it's contained there, it's going to change its key to some smaller value K. And don't worry about the edge cases here. We're always going to make sure that K is going to be smaller than whatever that key was to begin with. So this is really kind of a funky operation if I had a priority queue, not a changeable priority queue, but I had a priority queue. I wanted to implement a change of priority queue. How could I how could I do that? Well, a regular priority queue is already going to give me the first two operations. It's just that third one. I essentially need to find something by an ID and then update its key. So the the idea how to implement this is going to be to use a regular priority queue. I'm going to call it Q prime, and I'm going to cross link it with a dictionary D. So so these are just regular priority queue on my items that has the key as defined above, but I'm going to cross link it with a dictionary, a dictionary that maps IDs to their location in priority queue in the priority queue. And we've done this many times, right in our in our data structures lessons. We're trying to cross link to data structures to make a query on a different type of key to find its place in another data structure. So if we had a priority dictionary, we could do this stuff pretty fast. In particular, I'm going to assume that our IDs of our vertices are integers between zero and V minus one. And so for my dictionary, I could get a constant time looking up that ID by using by using what data structure. Okay. Sometimes I hear the answer hash table to this. So we could get an expected constant time if we use the hash table. But if we knew that our vertex IDs were just numbers from zero to V minus one, we could get rid of that expected time by using a direct time. We could get rid of that time by using a direct access array, right? So that's the assumption. And so really the name of the game here is to choose a priority queue. That's going to make these things fast when we start to look at Dijkstra's right. So we're going to use this data structure to keep track of our distance estimates to all the vertices away from S. Okay, so that's our algorithm. Same initialization step. We're going to set this distance estimate D, not delta, right? D. We're going to want the, just yeah, let's keep them straight because we have most going on again. But we're going to want the Ds to be our delta at the end of the algorithm. That's what we're going to have to prove. So we first set all of them equal to infinity and then set D of S, S equal to zero. And here we're never going to update it again because our shortest distance is in a graph with non-negative edge weights and they certainly can't go below zero. All right, now we build our changeable priority queue with an item and I'm going to say the item is X represented by like a tuple of its ID maybe. And then it's key just for brevity here with an item V of SV. So I'm going to be storing in my changeable priority queue the vertex label and its shortest path distance estimate D. And that's going to be the key, the minimum that I'm trying to be querying on for each V and V. So I'm going to build that thing. It's going to then have all my vertices in my graph. Then while my changeable priority queue still has items not empty, I'm going to delete some UDSU. So some item that its distance is minimized from queue that has minimum distance. Okay, so I'm going to look at all these things in my priority queue. At the start, it's just going to be S because everything has shortest path distance estimate except they have an infinity, right, except for S. And so that's clearly the smallest. So I'm going to remove that from my queue and then I'm going to process it. How am I going to process it? It's the exact same kind of thing as DAG relaxation. I'm going to relax all its outgoing edges. So just for completeness for V in the outgoing adjacencies of U, I'm going to relax. Well, I guess sorry, we have to check first whether we can relax it. Basically, if the shortest path distance estimate to V is greater than going to U first and then crossing that edge. If going through that is better. That is violating our triangle inequality that we learned about. And so we can relax edge UV and by that we mean set those equal to each other, right? That's what we meant by relax. And then we have one other thing to do. We've changed these distance estimates, but our queue doesn't know that we changed these things. We added these items in here, but it doesn't know that my distances have changed. So we tell the queue to remember to change its key value associated with the item V. Okay, so decrease key vertex V and Q to new DSV, the one that I just decreased here, right? And I know that I decreased it because I said it to a smaller value. That makes sense. So that's dexterous. So let's run it on an example. Okay, here's an example. A little nicer LaTeX V before you hear. I didn't want to botch another graph. Okay, so I have a directed graph. It does contain cycles. In particular, anyway, just, I can't really show you, I can't point. So check out the cycles here. There's definitely cycles in the graph. But as you can see, all of the weights are non-negative. In particular, they're positive, actually. It's going to just be helpful in writing out this example here. So let's run dexterous on this graph. First, we initialize and we set the shortest path distance, right? I'm going to, I'm going to, I want to end red here to, to all of our things. And then as I'm updating it, I'm just going to add arrows to show you guys what we're updating each, each time. So this is where we start. That's an initialization. That's after step one. And then I'm going to stick things into my queue, right? Here's my queue. It's everything. So I'm just going to set the number of items versus s, a, b, c, d. Got five items in my queue. Really, I guess it's the item paired with its shortest distance estimate, but I'm, I just have only written it here as this. So the idea is the, the while loop. Okay. Queue is not empty. Great. We're going to delete the one with the smallest distance estimate, which is s, right? Yeah. So I'm going to change that to 10. And then there's another outgoing edge and three is better than infinity. So I'm going to change its delta to three. Okay. So now I go back in here. I changed those distance estimates associated with my queue. I'm going to change the distance estimate to 10. So I'm going to change the distance estimate to 10. And then I'm going to change the distance estimate to 10. Okay. So now I go back in here. I changed those distance estimates associated with my queue. Next step of the algorithm. So s is done, right? I've processed everything distance zero away. Now I'm going to use my priority queue to say which of my vertices has the shortest distance estimate now. So which, which one is that a, b or c or d? It's three, right? Three is three is smaller than 10. So c. So the queue is going to magically delete c for me. Tell me what that is. And now I'm going to process process that. So I've changed my boundary, right? And now I relax edges out of c. So there's an edge at c. That's a four, four plus the three is smaller than the 10. So, so we update it. So s eight is 11. That's smaller than infinity. So we update it. And I relax three plus two is smaller than infinity. So I relax that as well. Now, of the things left in my queue of the vertices still left in my queue, which has the smallest distance, maybe d, right? So it has five, seven or 11. So five is the smallest. So I remove d from my queue. I relax edges from it. Now my boundary looks something like this as shown. Relax edges out of it. Five plus five, that's a 10, 10 is smaller than 11. So we keep it at 10. And that's the only outgoing edge from D. So I'm done. And then the last seven is smaller than 10. So I relax edges out of a. A to B seven plus two is smaller than 10. And now I'm done. So what I did every time I removed a vertex, I set its shortest path distance to the last value I assigned to it. So, C was then three, and then a was seven, B was nine, and then D was five. So I tried to add some colors in here to kind of keep track of what we were doing. So that's dexterous and action. It seems like, like these are the shortest path distances, but how do we prove that? Right? Did I do the right thing? Did I show you guys the right way to do this? We're going to find out here. So that's what we're going to spend some time on now, just talking about the correctness of dexterous algorithm. So correctness follows from two main observations here. The claim that we're trying to prove is that D of S equals the delta S. So the estimates equal the shortest path distance is at the end of dexterous for all V and V at end. And this is going to follow from two observations. So the proof here, first, if every relaxation sets D of S of V, it sets the estimate equal to the shortest path distance. If it ever does that, I argue to you that it's still true at the end. Okay, so that's not a very strong statement, right? That is saying if I ever set the distance estimate to the true estimate, I'm never going to set it to a different value later on. And why is that? Well, relaxation only ever decreases the distance. In fact, relaxation only decreases D S V. But we proved in lecture 11, two lectures ago, that relaxation is safe. And what does safe mean? Safe means that relaxation will only ever change these distance estimates to be either infinite. It was never, there was never a path to my vertex, or it was the length of some path to V. So what does that mean? It only decreases, but it's always the length of some path to V. So if this is the length of the shortest path to V, I could never set it to a smaller path, right? Okay, we got that right, right? Yeah, I could never set it to a smaller length because there are no paths with the shortest distance. Okay, that's the whole point. So with this observation, I'm going to argue our final claim. It suffices to show that my estimate equals the shortest distance when V is removed from the queue. And since I removed every vertex from the queue in this while loop, I will eventually set all of those distance estimates to the real distance and we'll be golden, right? So we'll be done if we can prove that statement, okay? So we're going to prove this by induction, obviously. Induction on the first K vertices removed from the queue. So the queue, we're popping vertices from this queue in some order. So I'm just going to argue that this claim is true for the first K. Clearly, that's true for K equals one. In the case K equals one, what is K equals one here also? That means the first word vertex that I pop has this property, which is definitely true, because we set the shortest distance to S to be zero, right? So that's all good. Now we have our inductive step. Assume it's true for K less than K prime. And let's let V prime be K prime vertex popped, V prime. Okay, now let's look at some shortest path from S to V prime. Okay, so we got the shortest path from S to V prime. It exists. V prime is accessible. Let's say we prune our graph to be only the things accessible from S so that there exists the shortest path to V prime. And now let's think about these vertices. Some of them were removed from the queue and some of them were not. This was definitely removed from the queue, right? But some of our other vertices might not be. And I want to be able to induct on this path, in particular the vertex before me, so that I can say when I removed it and I relaxed the edge to V prime, then we're all golden. But that might not be the case. There could be a vertex, the vertex preceding me in the graph in this shortest path that was not popped from Q. And I need to argue that it was or some other thing, right? So let's consider the first vertex in this path from S to V. We're going to call it Y. A vertex Y is not in queue after I pop V prime, I guess before I pop V prime, Y is not in the queue. Now these might be the same vertex if all the preceding ones in the path were in the queue, but in particular we're going to look at this guy and say it's predecessor. It's predecessor's X is in our path. So what do we know? We know that X is in the queue. Let's go back here. We know that X is in the queue. Everything here above was popped from the queue, not in queue, which means that by induction, the shortest path distance was set here correctly. So that the distance estimate at Y can't be bigger than the shortest path to X plus WXY. Okay, follow along with me in the proof. We're going through our proof now. Bottom right. But this is on the shortest path to Y because the sub-paths of shortest paths are shortest paths. So this has to equal DSY, the distance to Y. So actually Y is all good here. And so if V prime were Y, we'd be done. That's the same argument in DAG relaxation, right? But we need to prove something about V prime. Well, because we have non-negative weights, the distance to V prime has to be at least as big as the distance as, as, oh, this distance. Because of non-negative weights, right? Because the weights are non-negative. But because relaxation is safe, we know that our distance estimate for V prime has to be at least the shortest path distance. Because again, it's safe. Weights are greater than or equal to zero. The last step here is that because we're popping the minimum from our priority queue, the thing with the smallest shortest path distance, this has to be less than or equal to the shortest path distance estimate to Y. Because this is the smallest among all vertices in my queue. But those are the same value, right? If we look above at where we started. Those are the same value. So everything in between there is the same value. In particular, the estimate is equal to my true shortest path distance, which is exactly what we're trying to prove here. Okay? So that is why dexterous is correct. Let's spend a few minutes on running time. We set this thing up so that we did everything in terms of our queue operations, right? So we have our queue operations. We have three of them. I'm going to say that for our build operation, let's say it takes B time to lead to lead min. I'm going to say it takes n time and this decreased key. I'm going to say it takes D time. So what's the running time of dexter? Let's take a look at our algorithm again. So what does this do? We build once, then we delete the minimum from the queue. How many times? V times, right? We remove every vertex from our queue. Then for every possible edge, we may need to relax and decrease the key in our queue once for every outgoing edge. Okay? So the run time is B plus V times M plus E times D. Okay? So how can we implement this priority queue then? Well, if we use the dumbest, the silliest priority queue in the world, here's a list of different implementations we could have for our priority queues. If I just use an array, I can find the minimum in linear times, sure. And I don't have to update that array in any way. I mean, I can just keep the distances in my direct access array. I don't have to store a separate data structure. I just store the distances in my direct access array D and so I can find it in constant time and I can update the values stored there. And then whenever I want the minimum, I can just loop through the whole thing. So that gives me a really fast decrease key, but a slow delete min. But if we take a look at the running time bound here, we get something. If we replace N with V, we get a quadratic time algorithm in the number of vertices, which for a dense graph, this is in linear time. That's actually pretty good. Dense meaning that I have at least a quadratic number of vertices. So that's actually really good. It's a, you know, the stupidest data structure possible that we could use for this priority queue. Now we can do a little better actually not for dense, I mean not for sparse graphs, where the number of edges is at most V, then this is pretty bad. It's quadratic. We want to do something a little better. Now for sparse, a binary heap can delete min in logarithmic time, but it can actually, if I know where I am in the heap and I decrease the key and I'm in a minimum heap, I can just swap with my parent upwards in the tree and log n time and rebalance the, refix the binary heap property. And so I can do that in logarithmic time. And if I do that and I put it into our running time formula that we just this guy. Here we go. This guy. If I, if I put it into my formula, then I get V plus V times log of V plus E times log of V. And so that's going to give me E log of V. If I'm assuming that I'm first pruning out all the things that are not connected to me, of course, then E asymptotically upper bounds V. And I get this E log V running time, which is pretty good. That's just an extra log factor on linear, right? Now there's an even better. Well, okay, better, better is, is hard to say really there's a different data structure that achieves both bounds for sparse and dense graphs and everything in between. It gives us an E plus V log V running time bound and this data structure is called the Fibonacci heap. They get good theoretical bounds. So what you want to say is whenever I give you a theory problem where you might want to use deastres, you want to use that theoretical running time for your problem that E plus V log V. But if you happen to know that your graph is sparse or dense, just using an array or a heap is going to get you just as good of a running time very close to linear, right? So in practice, most people when they're implementing a graph search algorithm, they know if their graph is sparse or dense. And so they never bother implementing a Fibonacci heap, which is a little complicated. So they're usually either in one of those first cases where V squared is linear when your graph is dense, or we're very close to linear E times log V, which is V log V if your graph is sparse. So that's running time of deastres. So so far, we've gotten all of these nice bounds. Some special cases when we're linear, deastres, we're very close to linear. Belman forward, if we throw our hands up in the air, there might be negative cycles in our graph, but we got to spend that quadratic running time bound. Now there are faster algorithms, but this is the fastest we're going to get into for now. And in the next lecture, we're going to be talking about all pair shortest paths, and that's where we'll pick it up next time. You have stopped the screen share.