Hi, you guys. Good morning. Okay. Okay, good morning. Let's get started. Today's lecture is about a randomized data structure called the skip list.

And it's a data structure that, because it's randomized, we have to do a probabilistic analysis due to this randomization. The book actually randomly had some slides for this topic. So I'm just going to be using some textbook slides here. They've got some nice graphics for us. And we're going to sort of raise the stakes here a little bit with respect to our expectation, the pun intended for this data structure, in the sense that we're not going to be happy with just doing an expected value analysis or get what the expectation is of the search complexity in a skip list. We're going to introduce this notion with high probability, which is a stronger notion than just giving you the expected value or the expectation for the complexity of a search algorithm.

And we're going to prove that under this notion that search has a particular complexity with high probability. So we'll get to the with high probability part a little bit later in the lecture, but we're going to start off doing some cool data structure design, I guess, just just pointing to the skip list. So the skip list is relatively easy to implement. We can do a comparison after we do our analysis of the data structure as to what the complexity comparisons are for search and insert when you take a skip list and compare it to an ADL tree, for example, or a red-black tree, etc. In general, when we have a data structure, we want it to be dynamic, and the skip list maintains that dynamic set. What that means is not only do you want to search on it, obviously, it's uninteresting to have a static data structure and do a search, you want to be able to change it, you want to be able to insert values into it.

There's a complexity of insert to worry about. You want to be able to delete values and the richness of the data structure comes from the operations and the augmentations you can do on it, and the skip lists are no exception to that. So if you want to maintain a dynamic set of n elements, and you obviously know a ton of data structures to do this, each of which has different characteristics, and this is if you ignore hash tables, this is your first real randomized data structure. If you are just taking this class, you might have seen random data structures in other classes, but this is our first real random data structure. So we're going to try and do this in order log n time. As you know, with balanced binary trees, you can do things in order log n time, tons of things, pretty much everything that's interesting.

And this, given that it's randomized, it's a relatively easy analysis to show that the expectation or the expected value of a search would be order log n expected time. But we're going to, as I said, raise the stakes and we're going to spend a ton of time in the second half of this showing the with high probability result. And that's a stronger result than just saying the search takes expected order log n time. Okay. So that's the context here. Let me give us a bigger, is that going to help you?

Okay. You can think of a skip list as beginning with a simple linked list. So if we have one linked list and that linked list, let's first think of it as being unsorted, right? So obviously, this is sorted. But let's first think of it being unsorted. Suppose I have a linked list, which is unsorted, and I want to search for a particular value in the linked list.

And we can assume that this is a doubly linked list. So the arrows go both ways. You have a pointer, let's say, just to the first element. So if you have a list that's unsorted and you want to search for an element, you would want to do a membership query. If there's n elements, the complexity is order n then, right? So a linked list, the search takes order n time.

Now, let's go ahead and say we are sorting this list. So it's a sorted linked list. So your values here are 14, 23, 34, 42, 50, 59, and so on. They're sorted in ascending order. You still only have a pointer to the front of the list and it's a doubly linked list. What is the complexity of search in the sorted linked list?

Okay, it's order n. The sorting doesn't actually help you with respect to the search simply because you have to start from the beginning, from the front of the list, and then you have to keep walking, right? So, and still order n for a sorted linked list. But now, let's say that we have two sorted linked lists, okay? And how are these two linked list structured? So that's my first, this is my first list, right?

So we have 14, 23, 34, 42, 50, 59, 60, 6, 72, 79. What I'm going to have now is another list sort on top of this. I can move from top to bottom, etc. But I'm not going to have elements on top of each bottom element, okay? By convention, I'm going to have elements on top of the first element regardless of how many lists I have. We only have two at this point.

And also, right, we have a 14, which is exactly the same element. We have duplicated here. And that list is also sorted. But I won't have all the elements in the top list. Okay, we're just picking a couple. So we've got 14, 34, 42, they're adjacent.

Then we go all the way to 72. And I duplicate it. Now, this looks kind of random. But does anybody recognize these numbers? Maybe if you're great, maybe if you're from the great city of New York, these are subway stops on the 7th Avenue Express Line. So the notion here is that you don't have to make a lot of stops if you don't have to go far.

So if you want to go from, I'm sorry, if you are going far, I think I said the opposite of that. If you are going far, then you can stay on the train longer and not stop, right? So if you want to go from 14th Street to 72nd Street, you would take this express line, which is shown as our second list here. But if you want to go to 66th Street, what would you do? So if we want to minimize distance, let's say, so our secondary thing is going to be minimize distance travel. Okay.

And so you're going to pop up to the express line, go all the way to 42nd. And you're going to say, if I go to the next stop on the express line, I'm going too far, right? So you're going to pop down to the local line. So you can think of this as being linked list L0 and L1. You're going to pop down and then you're going to go to 66th Street. So search 66 will be going from 14 to 42 on L1.

And then from 42, let's just say that's walking, right? 42 to 42, L1 to L0. And then 42 to 46 on L0. Okay. So that's the basic notion of a skip of a skip list. So you can see it's pretty simple. What we're going to do now is two things.

I want to think about this double sorted list as a data structure in its own right before I dive into skip lists in general. And I want to analyze at some level the best case situation for worst case complexity. And by that, I mean, I want to structure the express stops in the best manner possible. These stops are very structured for passengers because they figured fancy stops on 42nd Avenue, whatever fancy stores everybody wants to go there and so forth. So you have 34 pretty close to 42 because they're both popular destinations. But let's say that things where I guess they get more randomized, if you will.

And what I want to do is I want to structure this double sorted list so that I get the best worst case complexity for search. So let's do that. And before I do that, let's talk through the search algorithm, which is going to be important. I want you to assimilate this. Keep it in your head because we're going to analyze search pretty much for the rest of the morning here, at least this lecture. So you've got a sense.

Oh, okay. Yeah. Anyway, so we just an example with 66, but we're going to write it down or we're going to read through it. We're going to walk right in the top linked list. So this is simply for two linked lists and we'll generalize at some point. So we want to walk right in the top linked list, L1 here, until going right would go too far.

Now there was this answer with 72, which I kind of dismissed, but there's no reason why you can't overshoot one stop and go backwards. It would just be a different search algorithm. It's not something we're going to analyze here. It turns out in analyzing that with high probability would be even more painful than the painful analysis we're going to have to do. So we won't go there. And then we'll walk down to the bottom list and the bottom list, I like to think of it as being L0.

It's not always shown as L0, but I like to think of it as L0. So in fact, do I have... So yeah, so it's shown as L2 here, but so walk right in L0 or L2 until the element is found or not. And you know that if you're... You know that if you're overshot, right? So if you're looking here for route 67, when you get to 72 here, you've seen 66 and you get to 72 and you're looking for 67, search fails, right?

It stops and fails and didn't succeed in this case. So that's what we've got for search. And that's our two linked list arguments. Now our top analysis essentially says what I have is I'm walking right at the bottom list here and my top list is L1. So I'll start with L1 and my search is going to be approximately the length of L1. The worst case analysis, I could go all the way on the top list.

It's possible, but for a given value, I'm going to be looking at only a portion of the bottom list, right? I'm not going to go all the way on the bottom list ever. I'm only going to be looking at a portion of it. So it's going to be L0 or L2 divided by L1. If I have interspeed, you know, inter, what do I say? Interspersed my express stops in a uniform way, right?

So there's no reason if I have 100 elements in the bottom list and if I had five just for argument sake, five in the top list, then I'd put them at let's say 0, 20, 40, 60, et cetera. So I want to have roughly equal spacings, but we need to make that a little more concrete and a little more precise. And what I'm saying here simply is that L1 is the cost of traversal in the top list and L0 or L2 is the cost of traversal in the bottom list because I'm not going to go all the way in the bottom list. I'm only going to go a portion on the bottom list. So hopefully everybody understands that. So if you want to minimize this cost, which is going to tell me how to scatter these elements in the top list, how to choose my express stops, if you will, I want to scatter these in a uniform way, then this is minimized when the terms are equal.

You could go off and differentiate and do that. It's fairly standard. And what you end up getting is you want to get L1 square equals L0 or L2 equals N. So all of the elements are down on the bottom list. And so the cardinality of the bottom list is N. Excuse me.

And roughly speaking, if you're going to end up optimizing, if you have this satisfied, which means that L1 is going to be square root of N, okay? So what you've done here is you've said a bunch of things actually. You've decided how many elements are going to be in your top list. If there's N elements in the bottom list, you want to have the square root of N elements in the top list. And not only that, in order to make sure this works properly and that you don't get a worst case cost that's not optimal, you have to interspersed the square root of N elements at regular intervals in relation to the bottom list on the top list. What you really want is something that looks like this, right?

So the search now, as you can see, if you just add those up, you get square root of N for L1 and you get N divided by square root of N for the second addition term. So the search cost is order square root of N. Because remember, we can drop constants and coefficients in asymptotic time, right? So that's it. That's the first generalization. And really the most important one that comes from going to a single sorted list to an approximation of a skip list.

So what do you do if you want to make things better? So we want to make things better. Are we happy with square root of N? No. What's our target? Log N, right?

Well, I guess you can imagine that our target may be order one at some point, right? But for today's lecture, it's order log N with high probability and we're going to leave it at that. So what do you do if you want to generalize? You simply add more lists. I mean, it seems to be pretty much the only thing we could do here. So let's go ahead and add a third list.

Okay. So if you have two sorted lists, that implies we have two square root of N. If I want to be explicit about the constant terms of the search cost, right? Assuming things are interspersed exactly right. Keep that in mind because that's going to go away when we randomize. We're going to be flipping coins and things like that.

But so far, things are very structured. What do you think? We won't do this analysis. But what do you think the cost is going to be if I interspers optimally? What's the cost going to be for a search when I have three sorted lists? Well, it's going to be Q root, right?

And the constant in front of that is going to be a three. So you have K sorted lists, then you're going to have K times the K root of N. That's what we've got. And essentially what happens is you're making the same number of moves which corresponds to the root of N, the corresponding root of N at every level. And the last thing we have to do is get a sense for what happens here is we have log N sorted lists. And so the number of levels here is log N.

So this is starting to look kind of familiar because it borrows from other data structures. And here we just substitute log N for K. It's the log N's root of N. And so it's kind of a scary looking thing. But what is the N's root of N? And we can assume that N is a power of two here.

So it's two. So two log N. So that's it. So you get a sense of how this works now, hopefully. We haven't talked about random structures yet. But I'm giving you the template that's associated with the skip list, which essentially says what I'm going to have if this, if it was static data items and N was a power of two, then essentially what I'm saying is I'm going to have a bunch of items, N items at the bottom.

I'm going to have N over two items at the list that's just immediately above. And each of them are going to be alternating. You're going to have an item in between. And then on the top, I'm going to see N over four items and so forth. What does this kind of look like? It kind of looks like a tree, right?

I mean, it doesn't have the structure of a tree in the sense of the edges of a tree. It's quite different because you're connecting things differently. You have all the leaves connected down at the bottom of this so-called tree with this doubly linked list, but it has the triangle structure of a tree. And that's where the log N comes from. So this would all be wonderful if it was a static set and N doesn't have to be a power of two. You could pad it and so forth.

But the big thing here is that we haven't quite accomplished what we set out to do, even though we seem to have this log N cost for search. But it's all based on a static set, which doesn't change. And the problem, of course, is that you could have deletions. You want to take away 42 for some reason. You can't go to 42nd Avenue. So stuff breaks, right?

And so you take stuff out and you insert things in. Suppose I want to insert 60, 61, 62, 63, and 64 into this list. What would happen? I mean, that log N would go away, right? So it would be a problem. But what we have to do now is more of the probabilistic domain.

We have to think about what happens when we insert elements. We need an algorithm for insert. So then we can start with the null list and build it up. And then you start with a null list and you have a randomized algorithm for insert. It's not going to look pretty, but it's going to look random. But you have to have a certain amount of structure so that you can still get order log N.

So you have to do the insertion appropriately. That's what we have to do next. So now we are looking at a skip list that has a few more levels. And the reason for this is it's only going to be interesting when you have three or more levels. The search algorithm is kind of the same. You just go up top and then you overshoot.

You pop down one level and then you do the same thing over and over again. But we are going to have to bound the number of levels in the skip list in a probabilistic way. We have to actually discover the expected number of levels because we are going to be doing inserts in a randomized way. And so it's worthwhile having a picture that's a little more interesting than the picture of the two linked lists that we had before. So the bottom level hasn't changed from our previous example. When you see things adjacent horizontally at the same level, assume that they are connected.

All of them. And so I have four levels here. And you can think of this as being the entire list or part of it. Just to delineate things nicely, we'll assume that 79, which is the last element, is all the way up at the top as well. So sort of the terminus corresponding to our analogy of subways. And so that's our top most level.

And if you have a station at highest level, then you will have it's not, it's got to be sitting on something. So if you've got a 79 at level four or level three, here, if we start at level zero, right, then it'd be level three. Then you will see 79 at L2, L1, and L0. And if you see 50 here, right, it's not in L3. So that's okay, but it's in L2. So it's got to be in L1 as well.

And of course, you know that everything is down at L1. So this is interesting from a standpoint of the relationship between Li and Li plus one, where i is greater than or equal to one. So the implication is that if you see it at Li plus one, it's going to be at Li and Li minus one, if that happens to exist, etc, etc. Okay, so if you want to search for 72, you would start at 14. In the top left corner, then you'd go, you'd go over across to the right to 79. And you'd look and say, Oh, 79 is too far.

So I'm going to pop down a level. And so now we are, we are at 14 in level L2 or the second line down. And then you'd say 50, oh good, I can get to 50. 79 is still too far. So I'm going to pop down a level. And then you go to 66. 79 is still too far. And 66, you pop down a level and then you go 66 to 72.

So same as we had before, hopefully not too complicated. So that's our skip list. It's still looking pretty structured, looking pretty regular. But if I start taking that and start inserting things and deleting things, it could become quite irregular. I could take away 23, for example. And there's nothing that's stopping me from taking away 34 or 79.

You've got a deleted element. A latent element. I mean, the fact that it's that's in four levels shouldn't make a difference. So that's something to keep in mind. So this could get pretty messy. Okay, so talk about insert to insert an element x into a skip list.

The first thing we're going to do is search to figure out where x fits in the bottom list. So you do a search just like you would if you were just doing a search. So you always insert into the appropriate position. So if there's a single sorted list, you would, you would that would pretty much be it, right? And so that part is easy. If you want to insert 67, you do all the search operations that I just went over and then you insert 67 between 66 and 72, right?

So do your pointer manipulations, what have you, and you're good. But you're not done yet, because you want this to be a skip list. And you want this to have expected search over any random query as the list grows and shrinks to order of order log in expectation and also with high probability, right? So what you're going to have to do is when you start inserting and you're going to have to decide if you're going to what is called promote these elements or not. And the number that the start with, I guess the notion of a promotion is that you are going up and duplicating this inserted element some number of levels up. So if you look at how this works, it's pretty straightforward.

What's going to happen is simply let's say I have 67, let's say I have a 67 and I'm going to insert it between 66 and 72. That's that's that much is a given, right? That's deterministic. So I'd like to insert it into some of the lists. And the big question is which ones, right? It's going to be really cool.

I'm just going to flip coins, fair coins, and decide how much to promote these elements. So we're going to flip a fair coin if heads promote X to the next level up and repeat. Else if you get a tails, you stop. And this next level up may be newly created. So what might happen with the 67 is that you stick it in here. And it might happen that the first time you flip, you get a tails in which case 67 would be just staying in the bottom list.

But if you get one heads, then you're not only going to put 67 in the lowest list, you're going to put 67 in the second level as well. And then you're going to flip again. And if you get heads again, you're going to put 67 up in the third list. And if you get heads again, you're going to put 67 up in the fourth level. And if you get heads again, you're going to create a new list above the fourth level and at this point, when you create the new list, it's only going to be 67 up there. And that's going to be the front of your list because that's the one element that you were duplicating.

So you're going to keep going until you get tails. Now, that's why this coin has to be fair. You're going to keep going and you're going to keep adding. Every time you insert, there's a potential for increasing the number of levels in this list. Now, number of levels is going to be bounded in expectation with a high probability of regular expectation. But I want to make it clear that every time you insert, if you get a chain of heads, you're going to be adding levels.

And so the first time you get a tails, you just stop, right? You just stop. So you can see that this can get pretty messy pretty quickly. And especially if you were starting from ground zero and adding 14, 23, all of those things, the bottom is going to look exactly like it looks now because you're going to put it in there. It's deterministic. But the very next level after that looks pretty messy.

It will look pretty messy. You could have all of them just like, I don't know, chunked in there in a big gap, etc. So it's all about randomized search cost. The worst case cost here is going to be order n. Worst case is going to be order n because you have no idea where these things are going to end up. But the randomized cost is what's cool about this.

Now, for the rest of lecture, we're going to talk about why skip lists are good. And we're going to justify this randomized data structure and show lots of nice results with respect to the expectation of number of levels, the expectation of the number of moves in a search, regardless of what items you're inserting and deleting. One last thing, to delete an item, you just delete it, you find it, search and delete at all levels. So you can't leave it in any of the levels. You need to find it and you have to have a pointer set up properly, move to the previous pointer over to the next one, etc. We won't get into that here, but you do have to delete it at every level.

Okay. So we're going to do a little warm up lemma. I don't know if you've ever heard these two terms in juxtaposition like this warm up and lemma. But here you go. So your first warm up lemma, it's a warm up lemma for this theorem, which we're going to take a while to prove. Also, I'd like to say that when we prove lecture or when we prove theorems in lecture, I always get emails, like scared emails, like, I don't know how to do this, I can follow your logic, but I couldn't do it on my own.

That's okay. We work through it in lecture, I prove it for you in lecture, but that is, that's because we have to have some theory in this, right? So, so don't stress. I go through it for you so that you don't have to. But yes, okay, so this, this comes down to trying to get a sense of how many levels you're going to have from a probabilistic standpoint. The number of levels in an n element skip list is order log n.

And I'm going to now define the term with high probability. Okay. So what does it mean? Well, what this means is order log n is sometimes like c log n plus a constant. Okay, let's ignore the constant and let's stick with c log n. And with high probability is a probability that this is, that this really is a function of n and alpha.

Okay. So you have this inverse polynomial relationship in the sense that obviously as n grows here and alpha, we'll assume that alpha is greater than one, you're going to get a decrease in, in this quantity shown. Okay. So, so this is going to get closer and closer to one as n grows. So that's the difference between with high probability and just sort of giving you an expectation number where you have no such guarantees. So it's, what's interesting about this is that as n grows, you're going to get a higher and higher probability.

And so this is our first with high probability analysis. And I want to prove that warm up limit. Okay. So usually what, what you do here is you look at the failure probability. So with high probability is typically something that looks like one minus one divided by n raised to the alpha. So the failure probability is that it's not less than c log n levels is the, is the complement of what we just looked at, which is the probability that it's strictly greater than c log n levels, right?

And that's the probability that some element gets promoted greater than c log n times. So why would you have more than c log n levels? It's essentially because you inserted something and that element got promoted strictly greater than c log n times, which obviously implies that you had the sequence of heads, right? And we'll get to that in a second. But before we go to that step of figuring out exactly what's going on here as to why this got promoted and what the probability of each promotion is, what I have here is I have a sequence of inserts potentially that I have to analyze. And in general, when I have an n element list, I'm going to assume that each of these elements got inserted into the list at some point.

So I've had n inserts. And we just look at the case where, where you have n inserts, you could have deletes and so you could have more inserts, but it really wouldn't change anything. You have n inserts corresponding to each of these elements. And one of those n elements got promoted in this failure case, greater than c log n times. That's essentially what's happened here. And so you don't know which one, but you can typically do this with high probability analysis because the probabilities are so small and they're inverse polynomials, polynomials like and raised to alpha.

You can use what's called the union bound. And I'm sure you've, you've used before in some context or another. And you essentially say that this is less than or equal to the probability that a particular element x gets promoted greater than c log n times. So you have a small probability. You have no idea whether these events are independent or not. The union bound doesn't care about it.

It's like saying you've got a point zero, zero, one probability that any of these elements could get promoted greater than c log n times. And there's 10 of those elements, right? You don't know whether they're independent or events or not. But you can certainly use the union bound that says the overall failure probability is going to be less than or equal to n equals 10 in my example times that point zero, zero, one, right? That's basically it. Now you can go off and say, what does it mean for an element to get promoted?

What actually has to happen for the element to get promoted. And you have n times one over two, because you're flipping a fair coin, and you're getting a c log n heads here, you just flip and you get one promotion. There's two levels associated with the promotion, the level you came from and the level you went to. And so a promotion is a move. So you're going to have to move one more level. If you count levels, then you have the number of promotions, right?

That's just simply corresponding to taking our one half shown here and raising it to the c log n, because that's essentially the number of promotions you have. And you've got n one half c log n. What does that turn into? So we've got n divided by n raised to c, which is one divided by n raised to c minus one, which is one divided by n raised to alpha, where alpha is c minus one. So that's it. So that's our first with high probability analysis.

So what I've done here is an analysis that tells you with high probability how many levels I'm going to have given my insert algorithm. So this is the first part of what we'd like to show. This just tells us how big the skip list is going to grow vertically. It doesn't tell us anything about the structure of the list internally as to whether the randomization is going to cause that pretty structure that we saw to be completely messed up to the point where we don't get order log in search complexity, because we're spending way too much time, say, on the bottom list or just above the bottom list, et cetera. So we need to get a sense of how the structure corresponding to the skip list, whether it's going to look somewhat uniform or not, we have to categorize that. And the only way we're going to categorize that is by analyzing search and counting the number of moves that a search makes.

And the reason it's more complicated than what you see up here is that in a search, you can you can see you're going to be moving at different levels, you're going to be moving at the top level, maybe at a relatively small number of moves, you're going to be, you know, you're going to pop down one, move a few moves at a time, pop down. So there's a lot of things going on in the search, which happen at different levels. And the total cost is going to have to be all of the moves. So we're going to think about all the moves, up moves, down moves, and add them all up. They have to be ordered log in with high probability. There's no getting around that, because each of them costs you.

And the theorem that we'd like to prove for search is that this is what I just said, right? Any search in an n element skip list costs order log n with high probability. So it doesn't matter how the skip list looks, there's n elements, they got inserted using the insert algorithm, that's important to know if you're going to have to use that. And when I do a search for an element, it might be in there, it might not be in there, doesn't really matter, we'll assume a successful search, right? That's going to cost me order log n with high probability. And the cool idea here in terms of analyzing the search in order to figure out how we're going to add up all these moves is we're going to analyze the search backwards.

So that's a cool idea, right? What does it mean exactly? Well, what that means is we're going to think about this B search, which think about it as the backwards search, okay, starts, it actually ends, so that's why there's brackets here at the node in the bottom list. So we're assuming a successful search, as I mentioned before, otherwise the point would just be between the two members, right, numbers. So you know that it's not in there because you're looking for 67, right? And you see 66 to your left and 72 to your right.

So either way it works, but keep in mind that it's a successful search because it makes things a little bit easier. Okay, now at each node that we visit, what we're going to do is we're going to say that if the node was not promoted higher, then what actually happened here was that when you got, when you inserted that particular element, you got a tails, because otherwise you would have gotten a heads that element would have been promoted higher. Okay. And that really means that you came from the left hand side. So you make a left move. Now search, of course, makes up and makes moves down moves, I guess, and right moves.

Okay, but this is a backwards search. So it's going to make left moves and up moves. Now the case is if the node was promoted higher, that means we got, we got a heads here in that particular insertion. Okay, then we go and that means that during the search, we came from upstairs. Okay. And then lastly, we stop, which means we start when we reach at the top level or minus infinity if we go all the way back.

Okay, so, so that's it. Let's go. Okay. So let's say that we're searching for 66. Okay. So I want to trace through what the backwards path would look like and keep that code in mind as I do this.

So I'm searching for 66. And obviously we, we know how to find it. We've done that. Let's go backwards as to what exactly happened when we look for 66. Okay. When we look for 66, right at this point, when you see 66, where would you have come from?

You'd have come from the top, right? And so if you look at what happens here, the node when it got inserted was promoted one level. So that means that you would go up top and the backwards search first, your first move would be going up. Now if there's a 66 up there, you wouldn't, you wouldn't go up one more, right? But it's, it's not. So you go left, you go to 50.

When you have a 50 up here, what would you stay at this level? No, you'd go up to 50 now because the chance, the first chance you get, you want to go up to higher levels. And again, this 50 was promoted. So you go up to it. Then you go to 14. And that's pretty much the end of that, right?

You would end at the high 14. So this would look like if, if you, you have an up move, then you have a left move, let's see, okay. Then you have an up move and a left and then an up. So that's our backwards search, not super complicated. If you're looking for 66 or 59, you do that. So that's, it's a much more natural, right?

And then we just flip it. Well, why am I doing this? The reason that I'm doing this is all, I'm doing all of this because I have to do some bounding of the moves. And I know that the moves that correspond to the up moves are probabilistic in the sense that the reason I'm making them is because I flipped heads at some point. So all of this is going to turn into counting how many coin flips come out heads in a long stream of coin flips. Okay.

So that's what this backwards search is allowing us to do. So let's go here, I think, okay. Okay. Sure. And that, okay, so the crucial thing that we'll do next, so the analysis itself is a bit painful, but there's a, there's a bunch of algebra, okay. But what I want to do is make sure that you get the high level picture, number one.

And the insights as to why the expected value or the, the with high probability value is going to be order log in, okay. But the key is the strategy. So we're going to go off and prove this theorem. Our backwards search makes up, makes up moves and makes left moves. We know that each was probability one half. And the reason for that is when you go up is because you got a heads.

And if you didn't get a heads, you got tails, that made you go left, okay, because of the previous element. Every time you're passing these elements that are inserted, and they were inserted by flipping coins, okay. So that's key point number one. It's about coin flips here. Now the number of moves going up is less than the number of levels. The number of levels is one more than that.

And we've shown that that's C log in with high probability by the warm up lemma, okay. So this last thing here is going to make up the whole analysis. It's going to make the whole analysis possible, okay. So the number of moves is going to correspond to the number of moves till you get C log in up moves. So what does that mean? There's some sequence of heads and tails that I'm getting, each of them with probability one half.

Every time that I got a heads, I moved up a level. The fact of the matter is I can't get more than C log in heads because I'm going to run out of levels, okay. That's it. I'm going to run out of room vertically if I keep popping up and keep doing up moves. So at that point, I'm forced to go left. Maybe I'm going left in the middle when I still had a chance to go up.

That corresponds to getting a tails as opposed to getting a heads, okay. But I can limit the total number of moves from a probabilistic standpoint by saying that during the sequence of coin flips, I only have a certain number of heads that I could have possibly gotten. Because if I got more heads than that, I would be up top. I'd be out of the skip list and that doesn't work. So the total number of moves is the total number of moves till you get C log and up moves, which corresponds to, okay, let's forget about skip lists for a second, okay. Our claim is the total number of moves is the number of coin flips, okay.

So these are the same because every move corresponds to a coin flip until it's a fair coin, probability one half, until C log in heads have been obtained, okay. So the number of coin flips until C log in heads is the total number of moves. And what we now want to show that this is order log in with high probability, okay. So the observation is that the number of coin flips as you flip a fair coin until you get C log in heads will give you the number of moves in your search, total number of moves in your search. It includes the up moves as well as the left moves, okay. And now what we have to show is that this is going to be order log in with high probability.

And then once you do that, you've done two things. You've bounded the number of levels in the skip list to be order log in with high probability. And you've said the number of moves in the search is order log in with high probability, assuming that the number of levels is C log in, obviously. So it's not that the bottom one subsumes the top one. It's the last thing to keep in mind as we get all the items out of the way, okay. This assumes that they're less than or equal to C log in levels.

That's the only reason I could make the argument that I've run out of levels, right. So let's do what we can with respect to showing the theorem. There's a couple of ways that you could prove this. There's a way that you could use a Chernoff bound. And this is kind of a cool result that I think is worth knowing. I don't know if you've seen this, but this is a seminal theorem by Chernoff that says if you have a random variable representing the total number of tails, let's say it could be heads as well.

In a series of M, not N, but M, independent coin flips, where each flip has a probability P of coming up heads, then for all r greater than zero, we have this beautiful result that says the probability that y, which is a random variable, a particular instance when you evaluate it, that is larger than the expectation by r is bounded. So it's just a beautiful result that says here's a random variable that corresponds to flipping a coin. I'm going to flip this a bunch of times and I know what the expectation is. If it's a fair coin of one half, then I'm going to get M over two. Expected number of heads is going to be an M over two. Expected number of tails is going to be M over two.

If it's P, then it's obviously a little bit different, P times M, right, if we're not flipping fair coins and such. But what I have here is if you tell me what the probability is that I'm 10 away from the expectation and that would simply apply that r is 10, then that is bounded by e raised to the minus two times 10 squared divided by M. So that is Chernoff's bound. And you can see how this relates to our with high probability analysis because our with high probability analysis is exactly this. This is the hammer that you can use to do with high probability analysis because this tells you as you get further and further away from the average or you get further and further away from the expectation, what the probability is that you're going to be so far away. What is the probability that in 100 coin flips that are fair, you get 50 heads?

It's a reasonably large number because the expected value corresponds to 50. So r is zero. So that just says this is, well, it doesn't tell you much because this says it's less than or equal to one. That's all it says. So it's a beautiful relationship that tells you how the probabilities change as your random variable value is further and further away from the expectations. Excuse me.

And you can imagine that this is going to be very useful in showing our with high probability result. And I think I'll just give you a sense of how this result works out. I'm not going to go through the algebra. You could read it in the slides if you're interested. But the bottom line is we're going to show that this little lemma that says for any C invoking the Chernoff bound, there's a constant D such that with high probability, the number of heads in flipping D log N. So I have a new constant here.

D log N fair coins or a single fair coin D log N times assuming independence is at least C log N. So what does this say? A lot of words, it just says, hey, you want an order log N bound here eventually. The beauty of order log N is that there's a constant in there that you can control that constant is D. So let me so you tell me that C log N is 50. So C log N is 50.

Then what I'm going to do is I'm going to say something like, well, if I flip a coin a thousand times, then I'm going to have an overwhelming probability that I'm going to get 50 heads. And that's it. That's what this lemma says. It says, let me, you know, it says, tell me what C log N is, give me that value. And I will find you a value D such that by invoking Chernoff, I'm going to show that an overwhelming probability that for that D, you're going to get at least C log N heads. So this essentially can be shown.

It turns out what you have to do is you don't have to choose eight. I think eight is, yeah, okay. So some people choose eight in literature, but you can choose D equals three C, just choose D equals three C. And you'll see in the algebra in these notes corresponding to what each of these values are, right? So expectation of Y, just to tell you is M over two, you're flipping M coins, fair coin with probability one half. So we're getting M over two.

And then the last thing I'll tell you is that what you want in terms of invoking that you want R. Remember, we're talking about tails here. So R is going to be D log N minus C log N. So you just invoke Chernoff with E of Y equals M over two. And what you're saying here is you want C log N heads, you want to make sure you get C log N heads, which means that the number of tails is going to be D log N minus C log N. And typically we analyze failure probability.

So what this is is going to be a tiny number. So the failure is when you get fewer than C log N heads. So, and that means that you're getting more than D log N minus C log N tails as you're flipping this coin. Okay. Fewer than C log N heads means you're getting at least D log N minus C log N tails. So that's why this is your R here.

Okay. And then when your R gets large, you can play around with the D and the C and choose D equals you know, something 8C, 3C. You realize that this is going to be a minuscule probability. And you can turn that around to get a polynomial. Again, a little bit of algebra. But you can show that this result that says that the number of coin flips until C log N heads is order log N with high probability by appropriately choosing the constant D to be some time number over C.

So you can do that algebra if you want. One last thing, we're not quite done. So you thought we were done. We're not quite done. Why is it that we're not quite done? What did I say?

I haven't done event A and B, right? So I haven't done the last thing, which is to show that the probability of event A, this is with high probability happens. And I need to show that probability of event A and event B happens. Or that this is with high probability, right? I should just say event A and event B happens with high probability. Okay.

And you can see that proof here. It turns out it's pretty straightforward. You can get the gist of it here. So thanks for being patient through this. I know a lot of algebra and numbers, but we got through it and there you go.