You have started screen share. Okay. Okay. Hello. Welcome to the 11th lecture of 381 our first lecture on way to shortest paths. Until now, we've only been talking about graphs that where we measure distance in terms of the number of edges in a path. Today, we're going to generalize that notion, but I just want to go over what we've talked about in the last two lectures. In the last two lectures, we talked about two algorithms, breath first search and depth first search to solve a range of problems. Here's some of the problems that we've been solving. Single source shortest paths where distances are measured in the number of edges in a path. And we used BFS to call this problem starting from a single source, usually a vertex s that we call. And we solve that in linear time. And we solve that in order v plus eight. That's what we called linear time for a graph. For the special case of single source reachability here, we had to return a shortest path distance for every vertex. And there was at most e things reachable from a vertex. So that's the bound we got. But in the special case for a single source reachability, when our output only has to list the vertices that are reachable from me, the number of things reachable in basically a spanning tree of the connected component of my source can almost be of order e. And so for all the little singleton vertices in my graph, I don't really know what I'm doing here. So I can get this in order e, but that's kind of a little optimization. The next thing we did was, well, we talked about connected components, and we didn't just reduce to a search algorithm like a single source reachability algorithm like BFS or DFS. We put a for loop around that to explore the entire graph by basically saying if I've explored one connected component, then I can look at any other vertex I haven't seen and explore the next one. And that actually was some with a little analysis also got linear time because I'm at most traversing any component of my graph once. That's kind of the idea here. And we can use that using BFS or DFS really because we're really just trying to get a thing that searches an entire connected component. And then this topological sort that we did at the end of last lecture, we did a full DFS to give an ordering of the vertices in a DAG. Maybe I'll specify clearly that this is only for a DAG where we have an ordering of the vertices. So all the edges go forward in that order, for example. And we also did that in linear time. All right. In this lecture and actually in the next four lectures, what we're going to do is instead of measuring distance in terms of the number of edges in the path. So previously distance equal the number of edges. We're going to generalize that. So instead of counting an edge, we're going to count an integer associated with that edge and we're going to call that a weight. So here's an example of a weighted graph G. And I've labeled weights for each of these edges. This is a direct graph on eight vertices. And I've got an integer associated with each edge. You'll notice some of them are positive. Some of them are negative. It's okay to be zero as well. It's just any integer edge weight here. So generally we're going to be, along with our graph G, we're going to be given a weight function that maps the edges to G. We're going to say integers in this class anyway. In other contexts in mathematics, you might have these be real numbers, but in this class we're just going to deal with integers only. So each edge, if you have an edge, we're going to say W of E. That's the edge weight. The weight of this edge E from E. So in general, for example, the weight from vertex B to F in this graph is what? It's minus four, right? It's right. It's right there on the downward edge shown in our graph here. All right. So why do we care about adding weights to our graphs? Well, this comes up a lot in many applications. For example, distances in a road network. Latency in a network is another example. Maybe strength of relationships in a social network. And you could imagine that it's possible that maybe you're like frenemies with someone, that you don't like them as much. And so maybe you have a negative weight associated with an edge in a social network. I'm not sure. Maybe not. Maybe you may. There's lots of applications where you might want different weights on your edges though. So that comes to the next question of how do I represent? How do I give the user or the algorithm these weights in my graph? We had a representation for a graph. Our common way to represent a graph was to store a set data structure on the vertices mapping to the adjacencies of each vertex, which we stored in what we called an adjacency list, right? Which really could be any data structure. Commonly, it's just an array of adjacencies. But you could have that be a set data structure where you can query in constant time if a particular adjacency exists in that graph. So on the next slide. There are two common ways to store these weights. One is just with every adjacency, I'm going to store its weight, maybe just in a tuple. Tuple, tuple, tuple. With each adjacency also store weight of the edge that it corresponds to just in any way. A second way, instead of trying to modify our graph structure that we gave you before, let's just have a dictionary of all the edges mapping to their weights. And we already know how to do that. Just any set data structure, any separate set data structure mapping edges to their weights. Bad notation. But you get the idea. And it doesn't really matter how we're going to do this. The assumption that we're going to rely on here is that given an edge, given a vertex pair, I can query what the weight of that edge is in constant time. So if I'm going to do that, I can either store it with maybe a hash table of hash tables, a hash table mapping the set of vertices to their adjacencies and then each adjacency list stores its adjacencies in a hash table. And that way in constant time, I can check what the weight is there. Or here I'm just I could even have just a single hash table mapping the pair, the edge, the tuple constant size to its weight. So either way is fine. We're just going to assume that we can query an edge in constant time, the weight of an edge in constant time. Okay, so this is that graph example. We're going to move on to what giving these edge weights implies for these problems that we've defined in terms of unweighted graphs. In particular, we're going to be concentrating on single source paths, at least for the next three lectures. But what we had before was that the distance before in an unweighted graph was the number of edges in a path. Here we're going we're going to generalize that notion kind of obviously to to weighted paths and the weight of a path. I'm going to call it pi here. So some weight of the path pi is just going to be the sum of the weights in the edges in the path. So edge in a path. I'm going to sum their weights. So that's all the weight of a path means I'm, I'm, it just, I'm going to sum all the weights in a path. That's all it means. Okay. So if I took a look, maybe there's a particular path here. There's, there's the path from a to b to F to G is going to be, let's look so minus five minus four or two, it's going to be minus nine plus two is minus seven. So that's just an example. So then what is the shortest path then will kind of obviously among all paths between two vertices, it's going to be one with the minimum weight. I sometimes hear the question, can I use the same edge more than once? So think about that for a second. Right now, right now that's, that's asking about the distinction in our class, which we have between paths and simple paths. So here, a weighted path doesn't really care if we've visited an edge more than once. So if an edge appears more than once in pi, we have to count that more than once in the edge weight in the one. In the weight of the path. But what we're going to see later on is shortest paths cannot repeat an edge more, more than once in certain contexts. So we're going to get to the problem there a little later in this lecture. And we're going to solve that actually in the next lecture. But if you have, we're getting a little ahead of ourselves, but when we have negative weights in the graph, it's possible that things can go wrong. Right. So, so shortest path. And in this case, I'm going to clarify that this is the weighted shortest path is a minimum weight path from S to T. Nothing too interesting here, but there's actually some subtleties that we'll have to deal with here. We were going to call just like we did with breath first search. When we talked about our shortest path, we're going to define an expression for what the distance or the shortest pathway is between two vertices. And we're going to represent that by a delta, a delta from a vertex S to T is going to be the minimum over the weight of all paths for all paths pie to pie from S to T. Okay, so there's a couple of things that can go wrong here. First thing that goes wrong is the same thing that went wrong with our breath first search. Do you remember what could go wrong with breath first search for this delta definition. So, so, except if no path just by convention, we're, we're setting delta S to equal infinity, but there's one additional problem with weighted shortest path. And it's a little subtle. It's, it's possible that a finite shortest finite length shortest path doesn't exist. And what do I mean by that? It means I could keep going through through edges in my graph and continually getting a shorter path. So if the shortest, the minimum weight of a path from S to T actually goes through an infinite number of edges, then this isn't really well defined, right? So I'm going to change this minimum here. And in mathematics, we, we would just to be specific, we would call it infimum. So, if in the case where the weight of a shortest path can approach arbitrarily small, then we'll call this thing minus, minus infinity, right? So, when does that occur? When, when could we have our shortest path go through lots and lots of vertices? Well, let's take a look at our example. Can you tell me what the shortest path from A to any vertex in this graph? So, well, we could look at this path I have to be, let's just take a look at B. I have a path going from A to B, that that is minus five, right? Okay, that's pretty good. That's pretty small. And if it seems that, and it seems that if I, if I go around this graph through another way, it might be bigger. So I go seven plus three plus eight, that's 15 minus one, that's 14, that's much bigger than minus five. So it seems like minus five should be good, right? Anyone have a problem with this path or, or a problem with this being the shortest path? There is something interesting happening here in this graph in particular, we have a cycle from B to F to G to C that has a negative total weight back to B. This has minus four plus, plus two, plus one, minus one. So that total cycle has a cycle weight of minus two, this negative cycle weight. So if I wanted to get to B, I could go there via the minus five weight edge. Every time I circled around that cycle, I intern might, I incur minus two to my pathway. So I, so I just keep going around this cycle over and over and over and over again. And I don't have any finite length minimum weight path. And in such cases, we, we just say that the delta is minus infinity. So the problem here is that we could have negative weight cycles, negative weight cycles. New slide here. Negative weight cycles is a problem in particular if, if there exists a path from S to some vertex V that goes through a vertex on a negative weight cycle, then I can take that path to the, to that vertex circle around the negative weight cycle and then proceed to, to V. And I can take that cycle as many times as I want. Then this delta SV we're going to set to minus infinity. And in such cases in our shortest path algorithm, we don't really care about what the shortest path is. We're not even going to deal with, with parent pointers here because there is no finite length shortest path. So I'm just going to kind of throw out my hands in the air and say, you know what, I can't return to your shortest path, but I might want to return to a negative weight cycle. If you told me that this thing has bad weight, maybe I want you to tell me what a path is that goes through a negative weight cycle to get back to S. So that's what we're going to talk about next lecture. This lecture, we're not going to talk about that. We're going to talk about way to shortest paths though. So in, in weighted shortest paths. Sure. In weighted shortest paths, we actually know an algorithm already to solve a subset of weighted shortest paths, namely BFS, right? Now you're like, wait, I'm like BFS doesn't solve weighted shortest paths. We didn't even know about weighted graphs. And how does that solve weighted shortest paths? Well, there's a couple of cases where we might be able to reduce to solving shortest paths using BFS. Can you think of such a scenario? So let's say, I mean, I mean kind of what we did before was we counted the number of edges. So if, so if we gave a graph, if we gave a weight one to every edge in my graph, then just that graph, the weighted graph corresponds to an unweighted graph using the other distance metric. So in that case, BFS just solves, solves our problem. And in fact, we can generalize further. What if all our weights were positive, but the same value, if it was all positive and the same value, then we would just divide by that value. Now we have an unweighted graph, which we can run BFS and then multiply shortest path distances by that value later on. And in fact, there's one further generation we can make, which is a little bit of a tricky graph transformation problem. But we can also get this linear time algorithm for weighted single source. Wave single source paths in context where the weights aren't that large. So if I have positive edge weights, if I have a positive edge weight, let's say like a weight of four, that's kind of problematic because I don't know how to simulate that using an unweighted graph. Oh, do I? Okay, let's stay here for a second. So, or do we have an idea of that, right? I kind of jumped again here, but I can just put four edges of weight one in parallel, I'm sorry, in series, the opposite of parallel. I can just convert this here into one, two, three, four edges. And if I do that for every edge in my graph, and we have positive edge weights, then that transformation can hold. Now that's not necessarily a good transformation to make though. Why is that? Because the weights might be very big compared to the number of vertices and edges in my graph. However, if the sum of all weights in my graph is asymptotically less than v plus e, we can get a linear time algorithm again by reducing to BFS. Okay, so that's great. But in general, that gives us a linear time algorithm in these very special cases. And in general, it's an open problem. We don't know whether we could solve the single source shortest paths problem in the weighted context for general graphs in linear time. We don't know how to do it. But what we do know are some algorithms that do pretty well. And that's what we use all the time. But one more special case that we're going to go over today is when we have a really nice structure where we have a DAG, a directed A-seq like graph, like we were talking about in our last lecture. For any set of edge weights, remember with BFS, we needed to restrict our edge weights to be positive and maybe bounded to get this good running time. For any set of edge weights, if our graph structure is DAG, it really has nothing to do with the weights. If the graph structure is a DAG, then we can actually solve this single source shortest path problem in linear time, which is pretty awesome. Now for general graphs, I'm going to show you in the next lecture how to, for any graph, even with cycles, even with negative weight cycles, I'm going to show you how to solve this single source shortest path problem in something like a quadratic running time bound. This isn't the best known, but it's a really practical algorithm for, anyway, and people use it all the time. I'm going to show you the Bellman-Ford in the context of the DAG algorithm that we're going to solve today. So that's a very general case in terms of restrictions on our graph, but in reality, most problems that come up in applications occur with graphs that have positive edge weights. You can think of a row network you've got, or not negative ones anyways. You're traveling along and it's not ever useful to go back to where you came from because you want to make progress to where you're going. So in the context where you don't have any negative weights, you don't have this problem where you have negative weight cycles. We can actually do a lot better by exploiting that property and we get a bound that's a little bit more like n log n. It's pretty close to linear. You're losing a log factor on the number of vertices, but it's pretty good. And this is called de-stress, and we'll get into that in two lectures. Okay, so that's kind of the roadmap of what we're going to do, at least for the next few lectures. But before I go on to showing you how to solve single source shortest pass in a DAG using this algorithm that we're going to call it DAG relaxation. I'm going to go back to the thing that we talked about in breadth first search, where in breadth first search, when we solve single source shortest pass, we output two things. We output single source shortest pass. These are deltas for the other definition of distance, the weights. I mean, okay, not the weights, the distances, the shortest distances. But we also returned parent pointers. We return parent pointers back along paths to the source along shortest pass. And we called this the shortest path tree. So I'm going to revisit the topic of shortest path trees. And in particular, it's kind of going to be annoying to talk about both of our quantities, distance and parent pointers as we go through all three of these algorithms. It's basically going to be going to be bookkeeping distances are actually sufficient for us to reconstruct parent pointers if we need them later. So what I'm going to what I'm going to show for you prove to you now is that if I give you the shortest path distances for the subset of the graph, reachable from S that doesn't go through negative weight cycles. If I'm giving you those distances, I can reconstruct parent pointers along shortest paths in linear time for any graph I might give you. If I give you those shortest path distances. Okay, so that's what I'm going to try to show you now. So here's the algorithm for for weighted. There's the caveat here. I'm going to write down for weighted shortest paths. Only only we only need parent pointers for V with finite shortest path distance. We don't care about the infinite ones or the minus infinite ones. We just care about the finite ones. So in our algorithm, I can initialize parent pointer data structure to be empty. At first I'm not going to sort any parent pointers. But at the beginning I'm going to set the parent pointer of the source to be none. So that's kind of what we did in breadth research as well. Right. Now what I've given you is I'm trying to show you that given all the shortest path distances I can construct these parent pointers correctly. So what I'm going to do is for each vertex you in my graph, where my delta S of u is is finite. What am I going to do, I'm going to say, well, let's take a look at my outgoing neighbors. That's kind of what we do in every graph algorithm for each V in the adjacency, the outgoing adjacencies of you. If there's no parent pointer assigned to this V, there's the potential that this you this this vertex you is the parent of V is possible. It's some incoming edge to be well, will it be an incoming edge to be if V not in P. I haven't assigned it a parent pointer. And so this means it could be my parent. When is it my parent along the shortest path. So we have some edge from you to be it has some weight. If I already know the shortest path distance to you and I know the shortest path distance to be if the shortest path distance from S to you. Okay. Um, so we've got us we've got some path here to you. And we know that we have an edge from you to be a if the shortest path distance plus our edge weight is equal to the shortest path distance from S to be a there may be more than one shortest path but this certainly is a shortest path right so we can assign a parent pointer back to you. So let's add one condition. If the shortest path from S to V equals the shortest path distance from S to you, then the traversing then the traversing the edge from you to be then exists shortest path that uses edge UV in particular that one right so set the parent of V to you. Okay, so that's our algorithm. Not going to prove to you that that's correct but kind of intuitively make sense right if I have the shortest path distances, you can prove by induction that not only does this parent pointer point to the right place along some shortest path here but it also does so in linear time because I'm looping over all the vertices and looping over its outgoing adjacencies once same analysis that we have for both BFS and DFS essentially. And then since we can do this since we can compute parent pointers for these distances, we are going to ignore computing these parent pointers from now on. We're just going to concentrate on computing the distances because we're going to have to take a linear time anyway at least so we can compute the distances and more time and then compute the parents after. Okay, so that's what we're going to do. So with that build up let's show an algorithm. How do we compute single source shortest paths in a DAG in linear time. Well a DAG I mean this is actually a super useful convenient thing in algorithms in general DAGs are just nice things they're they're kind of ordered in a way. There's this topological store order that we're talking about before this is going to play a key role. There's a really nice structure to DAGs not having cycles not having to deal with this negative weight cycle problem. You can only go in one direction along this graph it's very nice structure to exploit and so we're going to exploit it. And here's the idea we're we'll call it DAG relaxation. What it's going to do is it's going to start out with some estimates of what these distances should be so maintain distance estimates. And now I'm going to try to be be careful here about not mixing up these and delta's if you're taking notes try to draw them clearly, because we have both delta is shortest path. D is a distance estimate. So distance is what I'm going to be using for for a lot of this time. So we're going to maintain these estimates of distance D which are going to start at initially infinite. I don't know what they are. I don't know what the shortest paths are but they better be less than infinite or or else I don't care right. So that's the worst case scenario it can't be worse than than this for every vertex. And we're going to maintain the property that estimates upper bound delta SV we're going to maintain that they upper bound this thing and and gradually lower until they're equal. So this is the idea we start from an overestimate and upper bound on the distance estimate and then we're repeatedly going to lower that value as we gain more and more information about the graph, maintaining that we're always upper bounding the distance and we're going to keep doing it keep doing it keep doing it until as I will try to prove to you. These estimates reach actually reached down all the way to our shortest path distances. So when do we lower these things. We're going to lower these distance estimates whenever the distance estimates violate what we're going to call triangular. What's it called triangular inequality. Okay, so what is triangular inequality then. Triangle inequality is is actually a pretty intuitive notion it's basically saying that if I have three points. So this gives you a vertex v of vertex x for example the shortest path distance the shortest the shortest path distance delta of UV that's the shortest distance from you to be. It can't be bigger than a shortest path from you to be that also goes through x of my past I'm now restricting the past that I'm now restricting the past I have to the ones that go through x. The shortest path distance from you to be can't be bigger than restricting paths that go through x and take and are taking that shortest distance getting from the shortest path from you to x and adding it to the shortest distance x to be delta ux delta x v. That's just a statement. I'm restricting to a subset of paths I can't decrease my minimum distance right. This is the statement of the triangle inequality that the shortest path distance from you to be can't be bigger than the shortest path distance from you to x, plus the shortest path distance from x to be for any x in my graph that's not you and be such triangle inequality pretty pretty intuitive right. So why is this useful well if I find an edge in my graph if there's an edge UV in my graph such that this condition is violated for the estimates that I have it obviously can't be violated on my shortest path distances but if it violates on the estimates. SV is bigger than than SU I'm calculating shortest path distance distances from S and shortest path distances from S to some incoming vertex you plus the edge weight from you to be. Alright so so what's this doing I have some edge UV in my graph basically what I've said is that I have some distance estimate to you but going through making a path to be by going through you. And then the edge from you to be is better than my current estimate my shortest path estimate to be that's bad right that's violating the triangle inequality these things. They can't be the right weights they they can't be the right distances. So what we're going to do is lower that that's what we said repeatedly lower these distances estimate these distance estimates. I'm going to to lower that guy down to. Equal equal that thing. In a sense this constraint was violated but now we're relaxing the constraint so that it's no longer violated so relaxes a little bit of a weird word we're using it. Anyway, that's what we mean when we say relax this this thing is violated it got some pressure to be resolved. And so, so what we're doing is to resolve it we're just setting our left equal to our right so that it absolves at least, whoops locally. That constraint now it may violate the triangle inequality other places now that we've done this change but at least the constraint is now relaxed and satisfied. Okay, so relax edge by lowering d of s v to the to the above thing right I've got an error pointing up. That's what we're going to mean by relaxing an edge and relaxing an edge is what we call safe. It's safe to do. And what do we mean by safe it means that I'm computing the shortest past distances. I'm going to maintain this property that each one of our estimates has a property that it's either infinite, or it's the way of some path to be. So, so relaxation is safe. So each distance estimate s v is weight of some path from s s to be or infinite. And this is a pretty easy thing to prove. If I had the invariant that these were all weights of shortest past let's try to relax an edge, and we need to show that this property is maintained. So relax, relax edge UV. Okay, so now if I relax edge UV what do I do, I set my shortest path distance to be to be to be distance s u. Plus weight UV. There's a weight of an edge from you to be. Now by assumption that we're maintaining that this is the way of some path in my graph. If the shortest path distance to be is bigger, I'm setting it to the way of some path on my graph to you, plus an edge from you to be. So this checks out. So assign d of s v to weight of some path. I'm not going to write down all the argument that I just that I just had here but basically since this distance estimate was by some position before the weight of some path to be to you. Then this is again, the weight of some path to be. Okay. Great. So now we are ready to call this algorithm so dag relaxation initializes all of our distance estimates to equal infinity, just like we did in BFS, then sent my distance estimate to myself to be zero. Now it's possible that this might be minus infinity or negative at some point, but right now I'm just setting it to zero. And either way, zero is going to upper bound the distance to s. So in particular, at initialization, anything not reachable from s is set correctly, and s itself is set as an upper bound to the shortest path distance. Now we're going to process each vertex you in a topological store order so remember our input to dag relaxation is a dag. So this thing has a topological sort order we're going to process these vertices in that order. You can imagine when we're starting at the top all my vertices are all my edges are pointed away from me, and I'm just processing each vertex down this topological sort line. And then for each of these vertices, what am I going to do, I'm going to look at the outgoing neighbors. And if the triangle inequality is violated, I'm going to relax that edge the algorithm is as simple as that. For each outgoing neighbor of the sorry of you always get you to be mixed up here. If my shortest path estimate to be violates the triangle inequality for an edge for an incoming edge, then I'm going to relax u v, i.e. set DSB equal to DSU plus w u v. So that's the algorithm. So if I were to take a look at our example graph over here, maybe a is my start vertex. Also note that if I flipped the edge from B to C, this this is now a dag. In particular topological sort order is when there's a path through all the vertices and there's then there's, you know, some topological sort order. Here we've got a B, let's see, a B F G H DC that's that's a topological order. You can check all the edges. So, okay, so I said let's start at a let's actually use a let's let's use shortest path from E. Vertex a actually comes before E in the topological order. I mean the shortest path distance when I initialize I'm going to initialize e to zero and then all other things to infinity infinite. These are my estimates. These are not quite the shortest paths yet distances but when I get to a clearly I can't be distance to me being infinite can never violate the triangle inequality with something infinite or finite it doesn't matter right so I don't do anything today. Anything before my source vertex in the topological order can't be visited because it's before in the topological order that's kind of the point there's no path from my source vertex to anything before it in the topological order so same with B B is before a and topological order. Now I'm at E and it's possible we are violating the triangle inequality in particular here. I think the shortest path distance to F is infinite. But actually if I go to E through this edge with a way three there. I know that this is violating triangle inequality so actualizing so actually initializing F to infinity is wrong and I can set it equal to three right. Okay so stay with me here we're updating our our infinites. Now that might not be the shortest path distance but right now it's a better estimate so let's set it. Now moving on I'm done with E I moved to the next vertex in my topological order and again I relax edges out of F so here looking at eight. Three plus eight is better than infinite so let's say that C is 11 and three plus two is better than infinite so G changes to five. Now I keep going in the topological order G is next five plus one is six K so we found a better estimate for C so so this 11 is not as good as six right so six is better so we can replace it again. Here we haven't visited H before it's still infinite so going from G to H five plus minus two is three. This is this is next in the topological order right H to C three plus nine is bigger than six so that's not a shorter path three plus four going upwards towards D is certainly smaller than infinite so set that equal to seven then seven plus five going from D to C is also bigger than six. And actually you can confirm that these are all the shortest path distances from E so our algorithm seems to work does it actually work let's take a look. The claim to you is that at the end of relaxation this algorithm we've set claim claim at the end all the estimates equal shortest path distances that's the basic idea here is if I take the case vertex in the topological order. Assuming assuming that the distances are equal for the ones before me in the topological order I can prove by induction. We can consider shortest path from S to be the case vertex and look at the vertex preceding me along the shortest path. That vertex better be before me in the topological order or we or we are not a dad right and we've already set a shortest path distance to be equal to that thing by induction. So then when we processed you S to you to be when we process you in dad relaxation here process the vertex and looked at all its outgoing adjacencies. We would have relaxed this edge to be no greater than the shortest path distance right so so this is correct. You can also think of it as the dad relaxation algorithm for each vertex looks. All and its incoming neighbors assuming that their shortest path distances are computed correctly already right. Any shortest path distance to to me needs to be composed of a shortest path distance to one of my incoming neighbors through an edge to me so I can just check all of them. That's what dad relaxation does. And again we're looping over every vertex and looking at its adjacencies doing constant work. This again takes linear time. Okay so that's shortest path in a DAG. Next time we'll look at for for general graphs how we can use kind of the same technique and an algorithm we will call Bellman Ford case so that's it. You have stopped screen share. That's it for today.