Okay. Okay, welcome to Grand Finale of Dynamic Programming in 381. Today, we're going to focus on a particular type of problem that we saw at the very beginning with the Binajee, which is when you have an integer input and a natural thing to do with that integer input is to look at smaller versions of that integer. And this is going to lead us into a new notion called pseudonomial time here. We talked a lot in this class about polynomial time being a good running time, but pseudonomial time is a pretty good running time. And we'll talk about that and it relates to these integers.

We'll look at two new examples. We'll look at rod cutting and subset sum. And then we're going to review all the examples we've seen from kind of a diagonal perspective. Here. So let's go. Okay.

So as usual, we're applying our sort bot framework, sub problems, relations, topological order, base cases, original problem and time, quick review. So the hardest part is getting the right set of sub problems. And there's some natural choices for sequences. We try prefixes, suffixes, sub strings, excuse me, for integers like the Binajee. There's a given number and we want to compute that at the end, Fibonacci number. What we ended up doing was solving Fibonacci numbers for all input numbers, input integers between zero and that number N, or in this case, capital K here.

And that's a general technique. And we'll see two more examples of that today. Otherwise we take the product of those, right? And often that's enough, but sometimes we need to add more sub problems in what we call sub problem expansion. Even with extra constraints that let us remember some state about the past. My example of that was piano fingering, where we had to remember what our fingering assignment was in some sense from the previous step in order to compute the transition cost.

And this is a very powerful algorithm technique. And okay, so that was the focus of last lecture. We won't talk about it much here today. And then we can relate these sub problems recursively. And this is basically the test of whether your sub problem definition was correct. Can you write down a recurrence relation, which is just a recursive algorithm.

And there's a nice general procedure for how to come up with these relations, which is just to think up some question about the sub problem solution that if you knew the answer, reduced to smaller sub problems. And then you can just locally brute force all the answers to that question, which I like to think about as guessing the answer correctly, and then just directly calling the recursive things. But then at the end, you have to pay for that guess by looping over all possible guesses in order to guarantee that you actually find the right one, right? So once you identify this question, it's very easy. Dynamic Programming is all about just brute force anything that you want. And usually that leads to a pretty good running time, as long as the number of possible answers to that question is polynomial, of course.

Okay, so then we need to check this relation, check if it's checked that the relation is acyclic. And then it's often reduces to finding a path like a shortest path or something in a DAG, a sub problem DAG. We need some base cases. We need to make sure we can solve the original problem using one or more sub problems. And then we analyze the running time as usually a number of sub problems times the amount of non-recursive work in the relation, plus however much time it took us to solve the original problem. So that was our framework.

We've seen it four times now, slightly refined each time. We've mostly added some general techniques for sub problem definitions and how to write relations. So let's do a new example, which is rod cutting. This will hopefully be pretty straightforward, but it will serve as a contrast to the next example we talk about, which is subset sum. So what is the problem? You could imagine you have some resource of a given length.

Because I have been wood flooring shopping recently for our home remodel, I like to think of if you have a big plank of hardwood and you get some price for selling that length, but you could also cut that plank into multiple pieces of various lengths that sum to L and you could sell them individually. Maybe you'd make more money that way, right? And that's what this problem is all about. So you're given the value of every possible length you could cut. We're going to assume all lengths have to be integers scaled. So that's true.

So capital L here shown is the original length and little L is a candidate length of a piece you might cut. V of L is the value for cutting off a length L sub rod. And we're going to assume when we cut, we don't lose any material. OK, you can probably adjust for that, but it's not terribly interesting. And we want to know what is the best way to split up our big rod of capital length L into various rods of small length L, potentially different lengths. So we'll call this the maximum value partition.

In mathematics, this is called partition, a bunch of numbers that sum to a given number. And we want to maximize the total value naturally. So here's an example. Let's say our original length is seven and we have this table without the lines. Table for lengths, we've got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, all the different lengths here. And we also have a value that's an integer for cutting off a rod of that length and selling it.

It's like it's like the sell price, right? It's presumably monotonic, but it doesn't have to be. Many people really like buying powers of two lengths, something. So and those sell higher, right? So this doesn't have to be monotonic, but in this example, it is. And so I have this rod of length seven.

I could sell it directly for $32, let's say, but I could also split it into, say, a length one rod and a length six rod or a length one rod and two lengths, threes, or a three and a four, anything that sums to seven. And probably the most natural thing to do for this problem is a heuristic. This would be a greedy bang for a buck heuristic is what this is usually called, is to take the ratio. How much money do I get for a given length? Divide V of L by L and try to maximize that, right? If I had to pick a single length and sell many of that type, that would be the optimal thing to do.

So the first measurement one has a one in one, I should say has a ratio of one. That's bad, right? The next, the two and 10 has a ratio of five. That's better. And if you stare at it long enough, I believe six is the best has the highest ratio, which of all of these others are 30, yeah, they're somewhat worse. So if I double the three value, I get 26, which is quite a bit less than 31.

The closest competitor, I think it's two, because if you multiply this by three, you get 30. So if I sold three twos, I get 30. But if I sell one six, which is the same quantity, I get 31. So a slight improvement, right? And so that item maximizes bang for buck for that ratio. And so one natural partition is six plus one.

I sell one out of length six, and that leaves a lot of length one. And this will give me 31 for the six and one dollar for the one, which gives me 32. But this turns out to not be the best, which is actually the same as if you just sold it outright, right? But in fact, you can do better by selling three plus two plus two, and I would get 13 plus 10 plus 10. Two was a close competitor for the ratio for six, so it's a little better to sell twos, two twos, and then a three, because we get $33. And that turns out to be the best for this problem, actually.

And it seems really tricky to figure this out. In general, there are exponentially many different partitions, and we can't afford to try them all. So let's solve this with our sort bar. So what's the input in this problem? I didn't mention this is an integer length, positive integer length. So we have one output, which is an integer L, and we have another input, which is, I guess it's an array of integers.

So we have a sequence and an integer. We could try prefixes or suffixes or substrings of the value structure, or we could try for that integer, smaller integers. That's actually probably what I'd prefer. I like the way to think about this is to jump ahead. What feature of the solution do we want to guess? And presumably we should think about what is some length of rod that we will cut and sell?

So I have this big rod. Maybe I sell the whole thing. Maybe I cut off a thing of size one and sell it. Maybe I cut off a thing of size two and sell it. But I have to sell something. There's only L different choices for what rod lengths to cut off first.

So we can just brute force that in order L time. So what problem do we get if we cut off an integer of some small L length? Well, we just get the same problem with the rod length of capital L minus small L. The value doesn't change. It happens that I won't use the big values if I cut off some amount of the problem. But I like to think of this as we're just, all we're doing is decreasing big L, right?

And so my sub problems are going to be for each small L less than or equal to big L, solve that problem. So X of L is max value partition of length L, little L, for little L equals 0, 1 up to big L. So just the same problem, but with different choices for big L. And this is using this integer sub problem. Now, in this example, that happens to correspond to prefixes of the V array, because if I only have length up to little L, then I really only need the prefix of the value array up to little L. So you could think of it that way.

That's also fine. But I think this way is a little more generalizable. Okay. So I claim then this is a good set of sub problems because I can write a recurrence relation, which is actually pretty simple. Like I said, we want to choose some piece. So we're given a lot of length little L.

I want to choose how much of that rod to sell in the next piece. So I could cut off some of length one, or I could sell the whole thing or cut any piece sized in between, right? And the money I will get for that is whatever the value of that piece is plus recursively, the maximum I can get from all the remaining length, which is little L minus P. So very simple inside the formula, just the value of the first piece. We're guessing what is the first piece we'll cut off and sell, right? We get the value for that piece and then recursively, we see what's the best we can do with the remainder.

Now, we don't know what size the first piece should be. So we just brute force it. We try all possible choices for P, take the max that we get out of this formula over that choice. And that's guaranteed to find the best overall because maybe we cut off some piece, right? Now if you wanted to allow not selling anything, in the case of negative numbers, you could just add a zero to that max statement in our relate step. Then you might stop early if there's nothing left that's worth selling.

Okay, so topological order, it's very simple. We just have these capital L different problems, right? And if you look at, oh yeah, so we're looking at L minus P. P is always at least one. So we're always strictly decreasing L in this recursive call. And so as long as I solve the problems in order of increasing little L, I'll guarantee that whenever I'm solving X of little L, I've already solved all the things I need to call.

So if you're writing a bottom up dynamic program, this would be, this would just be for loop L equals zero up to big L in that order. This is equivalent to that statement. But the key is to check that this is a cyclic because we're always referring to smaller L. And so increasing L is a valid topological order in this subproblem tag defined here when there's an edge from an earlier thing to evaluate to a later thing to evaluate. Okay, so base case would be X of zero. That's the first thing we want to compute here.

And indeed, this formula doesn't make much sense if I have X of zero because I can't choose a number P between one and zero, even non-strictly. And so what does it mean? Well, if I have a rod of length zero, I can't get any money out of it. So that's just zero, right? That's an assumption, but a reasonable assumption. You don't get something for nothing, right?

Okay, then we have the original problem, which is just the length L rod. And then the time to compute this thing. Well, how many subproblems are there? Capital L plus one. So we'll say theta L subproblems and we'll multiply by the amount of time to evaluate this max, right? Just a constant number of things in here, not counting the recursive call.

And so that takes little L time. Little L is certainly at most big L. So we'll say big O of big L time. It's actually a triangular number, but it will only affect things by a constant factor. So we'll get L squared time, right? And we're done.

So pretty simple, straightforward dynamic programming. At this point, we've seen much more complicated examples of this by far. But it highlights a question, which is, is theta L squared polynomial time? So is this a reasonable running time? And I claim the answer is yes. This is a reasonable polynomial running time.

You might say, well, of course, it's polynomial. Look, this is a polynomial L squared. That's a quadratic polynomial. But it's a quadratic polynomial in L. And we haven't really thought about this too hard. But what does it mean to be polynomial time?

And this is a notion that's properly called strongly polynomial time. We won't worry about that strongly too much in this class. But if you look this up online, if you do a Google search, you'll see the difference. Polynomial time means that the running time is polynomial in the size of the input. And the size of the input is for our model measured in words, machine words. Remember our good old word RAM, W-bit words.

It's been very useful because it lets us assume things like adding two numbers is constant time as long as these numbers fit in a word, as long as they're at most W bits. And in general, we assume all things we're manipulating fit in a machine word because that's what the case where we normally work, right? And so the natural way to measure the size of an input, so in this example, in this problem, rod cutting here, the input is a single number L. And this value array V of L, which is capital L numbers, integers. So throughout this class, we assume that all the integers unless specified fit in a word. So we've got one word here and L words over here.

So the total size of the input to this problem is L plus one integers. So in this problem, input size is L plus one, which we can just think of as L, right? We're in asymptotic notation here. So it's theta L. So I explicitly didn't want to use N in this problem because usually we use the letter N for the problem, not quite always. But input size always means input size.

And so here we can compute it in terms of the specification involves L plus one word inputs. And so polynomial times should be polynomial in that input size in L plus one in our example. So of course, L squared is polynomial and L plus one, right? So good. So the next example I'm going to show is going to be similar, but the answer will be no. It will make it more interesting.

But it'll seem relatively reasonable, hopefully. So we'll come back to this issue in a moment. Here's the subproblem dynamic programming. This is the subproblem tag. These are just for fun. I've had some people email about needing to create these and stuff.

I just show these to show the theory behind what's going on. So this is the same example of these values, one, 10, 13, 18, 20, 31, 32 drawn here on the graph. It's the complete graph oriented in the increasing way. I think this is called a tournament in graph theory. So we have the base case over the top left. This corresponds to a length zero rod where we get no money.

And over on the right, we have our full right, our full rod, let me say, of length seven. And we claim that the best we can do is 33. And what's happening here is for every value like three, I could sell a rod of length three for 13. So there's an edge that goes from each vertex to one, three higher. And those all have weight of 13 on them. And then what we're essentially trying to do is find a longest path.

Longest because we want to maximize the sum of values we get. And we know if we negate all the weights, that's the shortest path problem. So we could solve that with the shortest path in a DAG. But what's shown here, the shortest path tree from the base case is what's shown. So it actually tells us that if we had a rod of length seven, the best thing to do is actually sell it directly for $31. The bold lines here are the shortest path tree, or longest path tree, I guess.

And if we had something like 10, we should sell it directly. If we had something of length 20, then we should sell one thing of length two and another thing, sorry, one thing of length four. Then we should sell one thing of length two and one thing of length two. And we get two times 10. And for the 33 case, we can sell one thing of length two, one thing of length two, and then one thing of length three is optimal. So you can read lots of information from this.

And if you write down the dynamic programming code, this is effectively what it's computing from left to right. So let's move on to our next second problem for today, which is subset sum. So here we're given the same multi-set. Multi-set means that I can repeat numbers. So this is just a sequence of numbers. But I'd like to use set notation because I want to use subsets because it's subset sum.

So this is n integers. And we're also given a target sum. And we want to know, does any subset sum, wait, does any subset sum to the target sum? This is actually a similar problem to rod cutting because rod cutting, we also had to split up our number L into different values that summed to capital L. So capital T here is playing the role of capital L. But before, we were allowed to cut into any lengths.

And so it was easy, in particular, L summed to L. Here, presumably, T is not in this multi-set. And we need to find a combination of numbers here that add up to exactly T. Sometimes that's possible. Sometimes it's not. We're only allowed to use each number once or as many times as it appears in the subset, I guess.

So here's an example. Say A equals 25789. And two examples are T equals 21 and T equals 25 for that same set. So I can get 21 out of these. This involves arithmetic. Let's see.

So we've got 579. So this is a yes answer to the question, does there exist any subset? Because 57 and nine sum exactly to 21. And T equals 25. I don't know a good way to prove to you all that there's no way to write 25 with these numbers quickly in a lecture other than I wrote a program in our studio to try to solve for subsets. Or you could write a program that runs the dynamic programming we're about to give.

And it will output no. There's no succinct way as far as we know to prove to someone that the answer, that the answer is no for a given target. So there's a nice succinct way to prove it. Yes, I just give you a subset. We'll talk about that more in the next lecture. But these are some examples of the questions you might ask and the answers that we're looking for.

So this is what we call a decision problem. In its original form, we're just interested in the yes or no answer. It's a single bit. Of course, in the yes case, we might actually want to find the set. And we can do that as usual with parent pointers. We'll get to that in a moment.

Most of the problems we've been seeing with dynamic programming are optimization problems and we're trying to minimize or maximize something. So we've always put a max on the outside in our relation step. Here we're going to have to do something that involves Boolean values. Yes, no true, false, right? So let's solve it. This is actually going to be hopefully straightforward in that we can just use our standard sets of sub problems.

So just like the previous problem, we have on the one hand a sequence of integers. On the other hand, we're given a single integer t. And what turns out to be right is to use prefixes or suffixes on the sequence. And integers less than or equal to t. So let's think about why. So we're going to use Sorbot for a subset sum.

Again, let's look ahead. What features of the solution should I guess? Well, I have n numbers. Each of them could be in my subset or not. So I have this binary choice for each AI. Is it in s or not?

There's a lot of questions to answer. I can't answer them all at once. But I could just start with the first one and say, well, is a 0 in s? Yes or no? There's two answers. Locally brute force.

If I do that, what happens to my problem? What new sub problems do I run into? What do I want to recurse on? Well, I've eliminated a not a 0. That will leave a suffix of the AIs. So suffixes on capital A seem like a good idea.

What about my target sum? Well, it depends. If I put a not in my set s, then the target sum for the remainder is t minus a not. So t went down. So I need in my sub problems to represent smaller target sums also. This is how you figure out what sub problems you should use.

You could just try prefixes on this, suffixes on the other, substrings. Anyway, you can try any of them. And yes or no, do I include smaller versions of t here? But you can also just think about trying to write a recurrence relation first, see what things you are naturally recursing on and then formulate the sub problems that way too. So that's kind of what I like to do, actually. So I'm going to have a sub problem for each suffix.

That's x of i. And for each target sum, and I use these capital letters for the actual target sum so that I can use lowercase letters for smaller versions of them. So this is going to be, does any subset, remember, don't first more important things. The more important thing is to define what your sub problems are. Don't just say it's the same problem, but where I replace blah, blah, blah, right? It can be very ambiguous.

So does any subset s of the suffix a from i onwards sum to little l? And we're going to have the sub problem. The other important thing is to say how many sub problems there are and what your indices can vary over. So i is going between zero and n and t is going between zero and big t. Okay, so remember, sub problems is n plus one times two plus one or theta n times t. Cool.

So now I claim I can write a relation. Like I said, by, so we have this suffix from a from i onwards in a. And so I'm just going to, because I'm looking at suffixes, I want to keep with suffixes. So I should try to guess what happens to a of i because then what will remain is a of i plus one onwards. And a of i can either be in my subset s or not. So there's two choices.

So x of it is going to be involved two things. So there's an operator here and then I have a set of two items, which is I could choose to not put it in a of i in my subset. In that case, I've eliminated a of i and what remains is a of i plus one onwards and I didn't change my target sum. I haven't put anything in s. So I will still want to achieve the same sum. So that is the case where a i is not in s.

And then the other case is if I put a of i in s. And in that case, again, I've eliminated a of i. And so what remains to figure out is what happens to a of i plus one onwards. But now my target sum is different because I put a number in my set. And so among these items, they should sum up to not little t anymore, but now little t minus what I just added, which is a i. So then if in this sub problem, I get something that sums to t minus a i, then I add a i to that set.

And I will get something that sums exactly to t. And so that's a valid solution to this problem. Because we have brute force all possibilities, there were only two. If we combine these in the suitable way, then we will have considered all options. Right. Now, what do we want out front of the curly brace?

Normally we'd write min or max here, but this is a decision problem. The output is just yes or no. So this is a yes or no answer. This is a yes or no answer. And so what we want here is actually or in Python, this would be called any. Just are any of these things true, right?

Because if there's any way to construct a set that sums to t, then the answer to this is yes. This is one of the simplest reoccurrences, right? But we're solving what I think is also a really impressive problem. We're asking, is there any subset? There are exactly two to the n subsets of a here. And we're in some sense considering all two to the n of them.

But because we split it up into n local choices that are binary and do them only one at a time, this is the local brute force versus global brute force. Global brute force would be trial subsets, sum them, try all subsets, sum them, see which ones add up. But we're in some sense collapsing a lot of these choices and reusing sub problems. That's the whole point of dynamic programming, right? For the rest of the sequence from I plus one onwards, I don't really care exactly which subset you choose. I only care what it sums to.

And that collapses a lot of different problems into the same thing. I really just want to know, is there any way to do it with exactly this sum? If I said, give me all the different subsets that sum to t, that would be exponential time. But because I'm just asking you a yes or no question, this choice only takes constant time. And we get to sum them instead of product, producting them because we're using memoization. This is the beauty of dynamic programming and this time analysis rule that we only have to sum over sub problems because we only compute each sub problem at once, right?

Without memoization, this would take exponential time, just like Fibonacci. With memoization magic, right? I just think it's beautiful. It's such a cool thing. So even though it's one of our simpler dynamic programings, I think it's an impressive one, right? OK, so topological order.

Well, let's look at these function calls. So here we have to be a little bit careful. When we call actually cursively, we always increment i. But sometimes we don't increment t. Sometimes t doesn't go down. So if I wrote decreasing t here, that would be bad because sometimes I call with the same value of t.

And I want to ensure that this has already been computed when I try to compute this, right? So i is the right thing. And we should say decreasing i. It doesn't actually matter how we order with respect to t. Just any order that is decreasing i will be good because these function calls always increase i. So we need a base case.

Let's see. Given our decreasing i topological aspect, I think the natural thing is to have a base case when my suffix is empty, which is when i equals n. So this is x of nt for any little t because we don't have a lot of control of how t is changing. But this is easy. So this is saying if I give numbers, what sums can you represent? The only sum I can represent is zero.

So if t equals zero, then the answer is yes. And otherwise the answer is no. So that's my base case. And that's enough. And we needed this base case because if we wrote x of nt, this would try to call x of n plus one, which doesn't really make sense. But x of n colon is in natural suffix, which we only allowed i to go up to n.

And that's the empty suffix. So that's enough. We need the original problem, which is the entire string from zero onwards and capital T for little t. That's our target sum. And then the running time, as I said, there are n times t sub problems. And the amount of work we spend for each one that isn't recursion is constant.

We just do a couple of subtractions, additions, do an or and recursive calls. So constant time. So n times t is the running time of this algorithm. Let me show you an example as a sub problem tag. These are interesting to draw, a little tough, but they're mostly easy to read. I think they're helpful to show what's really going on in the dynamic programming.

Remember that every node here corresponds to a possible sub problem we can have. So we have the choices for little t on the top. Little i on the left. So the original problem we care about is i equals zero, t equals six. This is the same example that I showed before where we had no actually different examples. Sorry.

Okay. So my new set is a three, four, three, one. We have four numbers. My target value is six. This is definitely possible. I can add three and three, right?

This shows that a doesn't have to be sorted. We're not assuming anything about the order of a and we're allowed duplicate values. And we see indeed there is a why here for yes, it is possible. And how do we compute that? Well, I just drew a bunch of arrows. So there's vertical arrows here always going from each problem to the next one above it because we have the dependency xi of t calls x of i plus one t.

The calls are going in this direction. So the dependency order is you have to compute things lower down before you compute things up here and indeed down on the bottom is the base case where we write yes for the first problem and no for all others because we don't have any numbers. We can't represent anything above zero. Then we have some blue lines. I don't you can't really see them again. These are just for fun mostly and they correspond to the numbers here.

So our first choice is do we include a zero, which is three? That's only possible if we're trying to represent a number that's greater than or equal to three, which reminds me I forgot to mention in our sort bar. I need to say this is an option. This option is only an option if AI is less than or equal to t. So anyway, that notation means if I put this item in this set that we take an order of only if this condition holds. Otherwise I admit because it's not a choice.

So that's that was shown in the previous slide. Why is that important? Because I don't want to call X on a negative value of t. We're only allowed to call X here when t is between zero and capital T. So that's a subtlety but important for the correct dynamic programming. That's why there's no edge here on this on this tag, for example, that goes through three to the left because there's no vertex there.

There's no sub problem. So only for little t from three onwards, we have this edge that goes three back and that's just the same pattern over and over. Okay, so that is subset sum. But we can come back to this question of is it a good algorithm? Is it polynomial time? So we have this running time n times t.

So new question is n times t, n times big t polynomial. And the answer is no. Why? Because for this problem, what is the input size? How many words of input do I have? Well, I have n integers and I also have the target sum.

So similar to our first example, our first example problem, our input size is n plus one. But now the labels really matter. Before it was l plus one and a running time was a function of l. Now our input size is just n plus one, but our running time is a function of both n and t, not polynomial and its input size n plus one. You cannot write that n times capital T is less than or equal to n plus one to the 27th power because you just don't know how n and t relate, right? Maybe t is at most n, then we're happy, but maybe it's not.

Maybe t is two to the n. Why could it be two to the n? Because what do we know about capital T? We assume implicitly throughout the course that t fits in a word. This means it's a W bit number. So that means it's at most two to the W.

And you might think, well, we know about a relation between W and n. So we know t is at most two to the W if it's W bits. And we know that our assumption is always that W is at least log n. That's the word RAM assumption, right? We don't know anything about an upper bound on W. In order to upper bound t in terms of n, I need to say that W is at least, I'm sorry, at most log n.

Then this would be at most n and we'd be done. But that's not very interesting. And generally, we allow W to be arbitrarily large with respect to log n. It has to be at least log n just to be able to index stuff. But W could be really big, much bigger than log n. For example, W equals n is not a crazy idea.

If I have a machine that can represent n numbers, why not represent n numbers, each of which is n bits long? Maybe it takes a little bit more time to compute on those. Might want to scale your running times. But it's quite reasonable to think about n bit numbers. And then this is n times two to the n. So this would actually be exponential time.

If W is two to the n, n times t is exponential in the problem size, which is n plus one. And that's just an example. W could be bigger. So this is not what we call a polynomial algorithm or strongly polynomial algorithm. But it's still pretty good, right? As long as we know that capital T is not ginormous, then this is a great algorithm.

And we capture that notion with a concept called pseudo-po... I'm sorry, yeah, pseudo-polynomial. It's not the best term, but it's the established term. It's like polynomial, but not quite. And the definition of this term, so we have the definition of strong polynomial time. Now, pseudo-polynomial time is that we're polynomial in the input size just like before and the input numbers, input integers.

OK, so in the subset sum problem, the input integers are capital T and A0, A1 up to A2. And minus one. So what we want now is a polynomial or what some people call a multinomial, where our variables are all of these integers and we want to be polynomial in them. So we're allowed to take some constant power of capital T and some constant number of AIs. We just can't take the product of all of them. That would be big.

So I guess I should say constant degree polynomial. And indeed, you might call it a quadratic polynomial in the input size and one of the numbers. So the subset sum running time is pseudo-poly, but not poly. And so while normally we think of polynomial time as good, exponential time is bad, pseudo-polynomial is what we normally call pretty good to be informal. So in particular, pseudo-polynomial implies polynomial in the special case if the input integers are all at most polynomial in that input size. This should sound familiar.

This is a constraint we've actually seen before. This is the condition when radix sort runs in linear time, right? Radix sort runs in linear time exactly when all the input integers are polynomial bounded in N, which is the size of the array, which is the input size. So same condition is appearing again. So this is sort of a fundamental setting to think about. The last thing I want to talk about is reflecting on all the dynamic programs we've seen so far and characterizing them according to the big techniques that we used in sort bot.

So the first big technique was how do we define our sub-problems? Did we take prefixes or suffixes or substrings of that sequence? Do we have multiple sequences and have to take the product of those spaces? Do we have integers and have to take smaller versions of those integers? Sometimes that leads to pseudo-polynomial algorithms. Sometimes not.

And sometimes we also had sub-problems that were defined in terms of vertices. This just happened in shortest path problems because that's the only setting where we saw dynamic programming over graphs. So let me characterize all the dynamic programings that we've seen in lectures. So for example, with the bowling problem with bowling pins, we only had to deal with prefixes or suffixes because we could just think about what happened to the first couple of pins, for example. For LCS, we just had to take two different sequences, but then we just guessed what happened with the first two items of each sequence. So that left us with suffixes.

With longest-increasing subsequence, again, we just guessed whether the first or maybe we assumed that the first item was in the longest-increasing subsequence, and then we tried to guess what the next item was. But that again eliminated everything in between. So we were just left with the suffix. This leads me to another characterization of the dynamic programming techniques, which is foreign addition to these basic sub-problems. We often added constraints and expansion, right? And LIS is an example of what we call non-expansive constraint, where we just added a constraint to the problem, which was, I want this first item to be in my longest-increasing subsequence.

But that didn't actually change the number of sub-problems. So it didn't expand the number of sub-problems. This is, I think, the only example we saw with this feature. Most other items, when we added a constraint, we also increased the number of sub-problems, which we'll get to. Okay, also, in a certain sense, there's multiple ways to think about this. One, Floyd-Weirscherl is a problem, or we define sub-problems based on prefixes of vertices.

So we had vertices one through n, and we said, is there a shortest path using vertices, just one to i. So that's a prefix of the vertex set in a particular order. So you can think of Floyd-Weirscherl as involving a prefix. You can also think of it as, if you're given an integer i and you're only allowed to use vertices less than or equal to i, and so that's also kind of an integer sub-problem. I'll leave it up here. The two examples we saw today, rod cutting, kind of, you could think of it as either prefix on the values, or I would prefer to think of it where we had an integer and we were considering smaller integers also, but subsetsum definitely had a suffix in addition to having an integer sub-problem.

So rod cutting, we can put down with integers because we looked at smaller integers, or up with the prefixes and suffixes, but subsetsum is really in both because we both looked at suffixes and smaller values of t. Okay, so Fibonacci also fits down here under integers. Fibonacci was another case when we had a number n and we looked at integers smaller than n. So what problems involve substrings? We saw two of them. One was the alternating coin game because we were taking from left or right, and so we had to look at substrings in between.

And the other is parenthesization, where we had to get something in the middle, and that left the prefix before and the suffix after. Both of those are typical ways where you get a substring problem. Okay, so pseudopoly, both subsetsum and Fibonacci are pseudopoly, and those are the ones that we've seen that are dynamic program pseudopoly. And then with vertices, it's all the shortest path problems where we also had a parameter which is the vertex. These are natural because the goal of single shortest paths is distance to each vertex. And so naturally we had a sub problem for each vertex for DAG shortest paths for Bellman-Ford and for Floyd-Warshall.

So back to sub problem expansion, we saw a couple of examples. We saw alternating coin game and like arithmetic parenthesization. So here we considered two different versions of each sub problem, one where I go first and one where you go first, and that was really handy, though not necessary. For parenthesization, it turned out we needed both min and max in order to solve max, so we really only cared about max. So we doubled the number of sub problems to make it solvable, right? For piano and guitar fingering, we increased the number of sub problems by a constant or some F to the F, excuse me, or some for five fingers.

This is a reasonable constant, right? For some amount of state that we wanted to keep track of of the past. And one example where we had linear expansion sort of is Bellman-Ford. So here we were expanding by how many edges are in the shortest path. So we really only cared about finding shortest paths. We said, oh, what about at most I edges?

So you can think of that as adding a constraint. And then there's n different variations of these sub problems, which leads to expansion. You can also think of it as just adding a single constraint, which is I care about the number of edges and that input is an integer. And then we're looking at the natural sub problems for integers, which is we care about up to the length n minus one. And now let's consider all lengths smaller than n minus one, right? And finally, the other main feature we had is the recurrence relation of all these shortest path DAGs.

How many incoming edges did we have? How many different branches did we have to consider and then combine in some way? So we saw a lot of examples with constant branching. Fibonacci, where we just it's the obvious two-way branching. Bowling, where we had a couple of choices at the beginning. LCS, longest common subsequence, where we had a couple of choices, what to do at the beginning.

Alternating coin games. And similarly, do we take from the left or the right? So just two choices. Floyd-Weirschl, there's two choices. Do we use that vertex or not? Subsets some.

Do we include this item in the subset or not? So that's also constant branching. And a lot of the graph problems, we got ordered degree branching, which leads to an order e term in the final runtime, namely DAG shortest paths and Bellman-Ford. And then a lot of examples had linear branching, in particular, longest increasing subsequence, where we didn't know what the next increasing item was. So there's n possible choices for it. Brandicization, where we had no, where we had to choose anybody in the middle as the last operator and rod cutting that we saw today.

The first rod could be cut. We could cut. The first rod we cut could be any length. Sorry, that was what I'm trying to say. And then finally, once you've considered, recursed on all the sub problems, then you have to combine them somehow. And a lot of the problems, we actually just take the one best choice, and that's our final solution.

And in those problems, the final solution ends up finding some kind of shortest path in a DAG. But there are a few cases where we actually took multiple solutions and combined them together to get the overall solution. And this includes Fibonacci, which is we added them not too interesting, right? Ford-Warshall, Floyd-Warshall, we concatenated to pass. The final solution is maybe the most interesting, where we had to take two parts, the prefix and the suffix, how to solve them and then multiply or add them together. And so these problems are not well represented by short path in a DAG.

Still a DAG involved, but it's like a multi-path thing. And then finally, the original problem, often it's just a single sub problem, is the original problem, I guess. And there are a few examples, namely DAG shortest pass, longest increasing sub sequence, and Bellman-Ford, and Floyd-Warshall. These were the order that we covered them. So the three shortest paths and then the longest increasing subsequence were there because we added this condition. We had to try all possible choices for this condition.

Do we also have one here today? No. Okay. So in fact, in retrospect, or we know this from the beginning, but for you in retrospect, right? These four dynamic programming lectures were all about showing you these techniques of dynamic programming from how to set up simple sub problems to different types of basic sub problems to constraining or expanding these sub problems and having initially very simple branching and then getting to bigger branching and different kinds of combination. I wanted to show you all of these ideas in some order.

If you look back at the sequence that we covered problems, we're slowly adding to these different main techniques. We're sorry, we're adding these different techniques to dynamic programming. And that's why I chose the examples that I did. There's of course many, many dynamic programming examples, very, very powerful technique. But this is end of dynamic programming and we will keep on keeping on.