Okay, good morning. Okay, perfect. So today we're actually going to start kind of a new section of this class up until now. I've mostly been showing you really cool, powerful algorithms, sorting algorithms, graph algorithms, data structures, trees, lots of good stuff. And you can apply those to solve tons of algorithmic problems, either by reducing to the data structures that I showed you, or reducing to graph problems that I showed you, or by modifying those algorithms a bit to fit your needs. Right.

So today we're going to start a new section on algorithmic design, how to from scratch come up with a polynomial time algorithm to solve a problem. And in particular, we're going to talk about an algorithmic design paradigm called dynamic programming, which is extremely powerfully might have heard of it before. It's probably the most powerful algorithmic design paradigm. In general, can solve lots of problems. It's a particular type of recursive algorithm design. And in general, this class, all of the algorithms are about their recursive algorithms, right.

And, and we're talking about recursive algorithm design at some level because we want to write constant size pieces of code that solve an arbitrary size problem. We have, we have some problem size n, and we're trying to write 100 lines of code or whatever, some constant amount that doesn't depend on the problem size. We have one algorithm that solves all instances of the problem, right. And so we have to write code that is recursive or uses loops or somehow reuses the instructions that we give the computer. And you might know that you can convert any algorithm based on loops into an algorithm using recursion. We're going to take the recursion, the recursive view today, in particular, because if it's very well with our proof by induction technique, which we've been using throughout this class.

Also, because it gives us some structure on how different sub problems relate in something called a sub problem graph that we'll talk about today. Here we go. Okay. And so we're going to start out with in general, how do we design recursive algorithms that sort of the overall encompassing everything right there's a cool acronym for this paradigm called sort bot. And so we'll talk it's it's actually not for for sorting it's just an acronym for sub problems. It's for sub problems relations topological order base case original problem and time, but it's an acronym that will help you hopefully remember all the steps you need in order to specify a recursive algorithm.

And dynamic programming is going to build on this template by adding one new idea called memoization, which is just the idea of reusing work that you've done before. And that's going to let us solve tons of problems. And, um, okay, let's let's get into it then so we'll start out today with a Let's go here. Okay, we'll start out today with sort bot. So here is is sort bot right down down our our left line column here. This is a recursive algorithm design paradigm paradigm and in general what we're going to do is take the problem that we actually want to solve, split it up into lots of possible sub problems.

And so the first part is to define what the heck are sub problems and in general, we'll want some polynomial number of them but it's pretty open ended what these could look like. And the hardest part usually in defining a recursive algorithm is figuring out what the sub problems should be. Usually they're related to the problem you want to solve. Often the problem you want to solve this is near the the last step here the original problem you're trying to solve is often one of these sub problems. And then you use the smaller sub problems in order to build up the final original problem. But sometimes at the end you need to take a bunch of sub problems and combine them into your original problem.

You can think one one analogy you can think of here is dividing conquer algorithms which also had this kind of style, but more generally we're going to relate different sub problem solutions with some recursive structures some some recurrence relation. This is just a recursive algorithm that defines how to solve one problem in terms of smaller sub problems for some notion of smaller. And this is given by the topological order. So if we think of the sub problems as a graph, and we draw an edge, but so that the vertices are the graph. Sorry, so the vertices of the graph are the sub problems. The edges are the dependencies between sub problems.

Then what we'd like is the topological ordering the topological sort problem we talked about in the context of DFS or or DAG shortest paths. What we would like is that the sub problem and the calls the recursive calls between them in this recursive relation forms a DAG. We want it to be a cyclic otherwise you have infinite loops in your recursive calls. And if you have a cycle you'll never terminate right and and so to make sure that these dependencies between sub problems given by this recurrence relationship is a cyclic one way to do that is specify a topological order. Or you could prove it some other way but often it's just for a loop to say just do it in this order right. Then of course any recursive structure in these base cases so that's a useful step not to forget we want to solve the original problem using these sub problems.

And then we analyze a running time at the end so six easy steps here actually the hardest ones are the first two which are interrelated. And what we're going to see over the next four lectures this is this is the first of four lectures on dynamic programming is lots of examples of applying this paradigm over and over together with the memoization idea which we will get to soon. Let's see an example first of an algorithm we've already seen which is merge sort. So so a divide and conquer algorithm. And let's look at it with the structure of sort bot here so for the sub problems. So our original problem is to sort the elements of a.

And some sub problems that we solve along the way are sorting different sub arrays of a so for every. Well not not for every I and J I guess but for some I and J's we sort the items from I up to J minus one. So I find that sub problem to be S of I J came. So this is something that I might want to solve the original problem that I want to solve is S of zero comma and where N is the length of the array so that's what I actually care about in the end, but we're going to solve that by writing it recursively in terms of sorting different sub arrays as follows. This is the recurrence relationship I've written it very simply here. Of course there's a merge algorithm which is somewhat complicated, but as we saw the two finger linear time merge algorithm given sorted arrays.

This is so this is supposed to be the sorted array version of the items I through M. So this is the middle element between I and J and the sorted array of the items from M up to J. If we merge those that gives us the sorted array from I up to J and that's exactly what merge sort does. So in general this relation is just some algorithm for if you're given the solutions to some smaller sub problems. So this is the sub problem that I want to solve. And so we need to make sure that our problem is bigger than the ones that we recursively call on, and that we don't get an infinite cyclic loop of recursions.

And here our valid topological order is to say, solve these problems in order where J minus I, the length of the sub array is is increasing. And we have to check because M is strictly between I and J, as long as we're not in a base case, then we know we can, the sub arrays will be smaller than than that one right. And so this increasing order gives us a valid topological order on all of the problems all of the sub problems. We have a base case, which is if we don't want to sort anything that's the empty array or at least in the original problem. And the running time then. There's there's no better way to solve it than the recurrence that we already saw how to solve.

So this is just another way to think of M log in merge sort in this labeled framework of sort box. Okay, let's go to another problem that does not fit recursion so well. Let's make it better. So this is, we're going to start with a very simple problem which is computing Fibonacci numbers. It's really just a toy problem to illustrate a very powerful idea which is memoization. The problem I'm interested in is, I'm given a particular number and, and I want to compute the nth Fibonacci number and in case you forgot that nth Fibonacci number is given by this recurrence.

Fn is Fn minus one plus Fn minus two was base case let's say F one equals F two equals one. I know there's yeah, we can get into that but that's that's what we're using today. We have to compute this this seems there is a recurrence. So it seems very natural to write it as a recursive algorithm so let's try to do that. We start with what are the sub problems well, maybe, maybe just to distinguish the sub problems from the Fibonacci numbers let's write f of I here this is a function and algorithm that we're going to define. It's defined to be the goal we're trying to get is the ith Fibonacci number given I so there are any of these sub problems.

We want a relation between them and then we can write the recurrence relation on these guys just f of I equals f of I minus one plus f of I minus two. So in other words recursively compute those Fibonacci numbers and then add them together that's that's an algorithm right. Next, we have T for topological order here of course we just want to compute these in order of increasing I from the base case, the base cases up. Another way I like to write this is as a for loop for I equals one to n will see why, but this gives an explicit order to compute these sub problems. And base case is just the same as Fibonacci numbers but written in parentheses, parentheses, the original problem we want to solve is f of n, and, and the time. So here's where things get interesting or bad.

What is the running time of this recursive algorithm. As I've stated it so far the running time is given by a recurrence. So in order to compute f of n I recursively compute f of I minus one or or f of n minus one here. And I recursively compute f of n minus two. So that will take T of n minus two. Our first step will take T of n minus one.

And now I need to solve the recurrence. This is not a recurrence that falls to the master method it doesn't have to be, it doesn't have a divided by. So we have to think about it a little bit right. We don't have to think too hard because we've seen it three times now on this on the slide. It's a little bit worse because in addition to those, those recursions because I also spend a constant time to do the addition step from from the, or the addition from the relate step, maybe more than constant time. But if we just count the number of additions we do, it will be plus one additions.

Okay, but, but this is bigger than the end Fibonacci number. And if you know anything about Fibonacci numbers they grow exponentially they're, they're about golden ratio to the end. And that's bad because golden ratio is bigger than one so this is exponential growth, as we know, especially in this time. And in this class, exponential growth is bad in algorithms exponential growth is bad because we can only solve very small problems with that with exponential growth, very small. And so this is a terrible way to compute the end Fibonacci number exponential is bad. And so don't do this, but there's a very tiny tweak to this algorithm that makes it really good which is called memoization.

And this is a big idea it's it's it's the big idea of dynamic programming. It's a funny word probably made up by by computer scientists instead of memorization it's memoization, because we're going to write things down in a memo pad. And that that's the idea anyway. And it's a very simple idea which is just to remember and reuse solutions to sub problems. So let's look at the recursion tree for this Fibonacci recursive algorithm as we've done it so far. So at the top we're calling f of m, and then that calls f of n minus one and f of n minus two, and then the left side calls f of n minus two and f of n minus three the right side calls f of n minus three and f of n minus four.

Okay, and we noticed that the two sub problems in the middle are the same. So to compute f of n minus one, I need f of n minus three, and I also need to compute f of n minus two, I need, I'm sorry, and also to compute f of n minus two, I need f of n minus three so why are we computing it twice let's just do it once when we follow it, let's write it in a table somewhere. And then when we need it again we'll just reuse that. You can see f of n minus two is also shared shown here with a different little symbol here f of n minus two is is already here so that was at the same level but we also get shared reuse between the two sub problems. In fact, I wouldn't even call f of n minus three because the whole right part doesn't need to be computed a second time. If I already computed on the left, it doesn't matter which one comes first let's say the left one comes first.

Once that left side is done, I can write it down, reuse it over again on my right side, and then one more level down on the left side of the tree we're going to call f of n minus three so there's still another computation of f of n minus three. And I won't need to do it recursively. Okay, so magically this is going to make this algorithm efficient with this very simple tweak let me show you this tweak more explicitly here. I won't show code here but just as described in a data structure. We're going to maintain our good friend the dictionary which is abstract data type or interface we could use different data structures to do it, but we're going to map some problems to their solutions, at least the ones that we've solved already. So we can do this with just a different access, I'm sorry, a direct access array, though you could use a hash table so so when we write the code for a recursive function, we define the f of i, and am I, am I in base case like that's that's what we need to be thinking about right define f of i and it says am I in a base case if so return this otherwise do this recursive call that's our that's our recursive algorithm that's kind of the way that we need to be thinking about this.

But we're going to do, let's see we're going to do a little more now at first we're going to check back to whether the sub problem that we're trying to solve has already been solved. So we return that storage solution that's the easy case but it might not exist, and then we'll compute it the usual way so what the code that would look like to define f of i is first check I check is I in our data structure. We usually call the memo so we say is this sub problem is I in my memo data structure if so just return memo by done no recursion recursion necessary. Otherwise check if I'm in a base case, if so done, otherwise recursive so recursively call f of i minus one and f of i minus two. So what happens. So if you think about happens we'll just have to we'll just have recursion down the left side of our tree and all the branches all the right branches will be free we can just look things up in the memo table.

So what's the overall running time then for Fibonacci this could be order it. So why is it order and this is number of addition so I'll come back to that in a second. In general the way we the way to analyze an algorithm like this that uses memoization is we just count how many different sub problems are there, because once we solve the sub problems will never solve it again that's the whole idea of the memo table. So we will solve each sub problem at most once. And so we just need to count how much time does it take to solve every sub problem. And here you can see it's constant, either it's a base case and it takes constant amount of time.

So we recursively call our functions but those are different sub problems so we're going to count those later. And then the work that's actually done by this recurrence is is a single edition. So in fact, it's in additions to compute f of n would be exactly and additions. So it turns out to be very nice closed form in this case it should be exactly and some problems to compute f of n because we we stay, we started as, as dot at I, and, and then we'll just do it again. And, and then each one has an additional. It's not the base case maybe n minus two.

Okay, definitely order and now there's this one subtlety which let's forget about about dynamic programming for a minute and go back to go to lecture one and two, talking about the word ram model of computation. So I shouldn't hear that usually doesn't matter in this class usually we assume additions take constant time, and, and we usually do that because it's usually true. And in general, our model is the W bit additions where W is our machine word size takes constant time. So this problem, and this problem only pretty much for Fibonacci numbers I happen to know that Fibonacci numbers grow exponentially. So to write them down actually requires theta n bits because they are some constant to the n power. And it's probably really big and is probably bigger than W.

Usually you think of numbers that are much bigger than 64 or whatever your word size happens to be. But we do assume that W is at least log n but n is probably bigger than W. It might be bigger or smaller we don't know and in general to do an n bit addition is going to take ceiling of n over W time. So we will spend n plus n squared over W time. So it's a bit weird of a of a runtime here, but it's polynomial, whereas the original recursive algorithm was exponential here, using this one simple idea of just remembering the work we've done suddenly this is the recursive algorithm becomes polynomial. Why because we have few sub problems we had n sub problems.

And for each sub problem we could write a recurrence relation that if we already knew the solutions to smaller sub problems, we could compute this bigger problem very efficiently. So we have to be to be constant time or constant additions and over W time, but we have this nice formula that the time it takes at most this is at most the sum overall sub problems of the relation time. And that gives us a way to bound the running time to one of these algorithms if we use memoization without memoization this is not true Fibonacci takes exponential time, but if we add memoization we know that we only solve each sub problem once. So I'm going to just see for each one how much did it cost me to compute it, assuming all the recursion work is free because that is already taken into account by the summation. So in particular, this this summation is at most the number of sub problems times the time per sub problem, which in this case was order n. We have to apply that analysis to merge sort because after all, this is also a recursive algorithm.

It happens to not benefit from memoization but we could throw in memoization and wouldn't hurt us. And if you if you think about the call graph here which is s of zero and which calls f of zero and over two and over and over to and and so on. It has the same picture but there's actually no common substructure here, you'll never see a repeated sub problem because this range is completely disjoint from from the other range right. So you could throw in memoization and try to analyze in the same way and say well how many sub problems are there. It looks like there's n choices for I and not quite and choices, but it's at most and square different choices. In fact, it's the triangular number square number sum of I equals one to N of I different possible choices for I and J.

This is theta n squared sub problems which seems not so good. And then how much time are we spending for a sub problem. Well to solve S of I J we have to merge about that many elements. We know merge takes linear time. And so this takes theta J minus one time to evaluate. And so what we'd like to do is sum over all the sub problems of J minus I.

And this is not the triangular number, but the tetrahedral number I guess. So we end up that the running time is at most and cute. Great. So it's true that and log in is less than or equal to and cubed but obviously not terribly useful. This algorithm by the way we already know how to analyze it is indeed and log in and the running time turns out to be theta and log in. So sometimes this equation is not what you want to use but often it's good enough.

And especially if you just want to get a polynomial upper bound, then you can try to optimize it later. This will give you a polynomial upper bound as long as the number of sub problems is polynomial and the time per sub problem is polynomial. And indeed and cubed is polynomial. It's not a great polynomial. But this is an adequate way to analyze merge sort obviously don't do this for merge sort but it illustrates the technique. So the next thing I'd like to do is show you one more algorithm that we've already seen in this class if it's nicely into this structure arguably is dynamic programming and that is dag shortest pass.

Here we go. So, just to close the loop here when I say dynamic programming will go here. When I say dynamic programming I mean recursion with memoization. I mean we take we write a recursive piece of code which is like to find f of some arguments. Some sub problem specification we check is the problem in the memo table if so return memo sub problem and otherwise check if it's a base case and solve it if it's a base case and otherwise write the recursive the recurrence, recurse via relation. And so the memo table of the sub problem to be one of those things.

Okay, so this is the generic dynamic programming and implicitly I'm writing Fibonacci in that way. And all the dynamic programs have this implicit structure where I start with a memo table which is empty. And I always check if I'm in the memo table if I am return it. Otherwise, I compute according to this recursive relation by recursively calling f. And so that's it. So this is every dynamic program, every dynamic programming algorithm is going to have that structure.

And it's just using recursion and memoization together. Okay, so now let's apply that technique to think about the dag shortest path problem. The problem is, I give you I give you a dag I give you a source vertex as single source shortest path. Compute the shortest pathway from s to every vertex. That's the goal of the problem. And we saw a way to solve that which is dag relaxation.

I'm going to show you a different way, which turns out to be basically the same but upside down or flipped left, right, depending on which way you direct your edges. So what are our sub problems. Well, here actually they're kind of spelled out for us we want to compute delta of SV for all V. So what is the size of the sub problems. That turns out to be enough for this overall problem. And the original problem.

The original problem we want to solve is all of the sub problems. So we've got we've got size of the sub problems. We know the original problem. We solve all the sub problems. We're done. And then we have I think we saw this at some point during the, the dag shortest past lecture, we have a recursive relation saying that the shortest way to get from s to V is the minimum of the shortest path to get to some vertex you can get from the edge of the vertex plus the weight of the edge from you to be why because if we look at vertex V unless we started there, we came from somewhere.

And so we can consider all the possible choices for the vertex for the previous vertex you can get to V. And excuse me if you start at s and get to V you must go through one of them. And so this is finding the best way among all the choices of you what's the best way to get to you, and then take the edge from you to be for all edges, you be for all edges. And this would be a J since C minus we don't usually think of that we usually look at a J since C plus the outgoing edges. This is the incoming edges and so you as an incoming you UV is an incoming edge into V. Okay, if we take that minimum and of course, it's possible there's no way to get to be also so I'll also throw infinity into that set.

So take the minimum of that set, that will give me the shortest pathway in an acyclic graph from s to V. And this is, and great right this is this is recursive this is a sub problem. So our sub problems which are smaller, I guess there's no clear notion of smaller here except we already know the clear notion of smaller is the topological order of our deck. Because our graph is acyclic we know it has a topological order of course, we know how to compute it with DFS. And so that guarantees there's a topological order to compute these problems. In fact, the relationship between problems is exactly the given graph.

G, in order to compute the shortest path from S to V, I need to know the shortest pathway from S to all the incoming vertices, all of the incoming vertices to V. Okay, we have a base case, which is delta of s s equals zero. And the running time is again, we can use our previous formula and say let's just sum up over all the sub problems of the non recursive work in our, in our recurrence relation and so it's just min shown in the relate step. If I gave you these deltas for free and I gave you these weights which we know from our weight data structure, how long does it take to compute the min. Well, however many things there are, however many things were menning, which is the size of the incoming adjacency list plus one for that infinity. And so if you compute the sum sum of incoming edges to every vertex that's all the edges.

So that is v plus e so in fact this algorithm is morally the same as the one we saw in the DAG shortest path lecture, which was compute a which, yeah is the topological order and process vertices in that order, and relax edges going out from vertices. A funny thing, although we wrote down the topological order of the sub problem graph here is the topological order of G, because the sub problem graph is G the algorithm doesn't actually have to compute one. It's, it's doing it automatically for free. If you think about about this algorithm generic dynamic programming algorithm. This is a check, check whether we're in a memo table. If so return otherwise recurs or base case.

This is actually a depth first search through the sub problem graph technically through the reverse of the sub problem graph. I draw an edge so so from small to big. So I'm just saying I orient the edges from my smaller sub problems to the ones that needed, then I'm actually depth first searching backwards in this graph because the bigger problem calls the smaller sub problem graph and the memo table is serving as the have I already visited this vertex already check in DFS. So this is actually a DFS algorithm plus we're doing some computation to actually solve the sub problems we care about. So implicit in this algorithm we're actually doing a DFS at the same time. We're doing the shortest path computation in the finishing order of that DFS traversal because all the edges are backwards.

The same as the reverse finishing order if the graph is forwards. So in the end we're can be we're computing a topological order because dynamic programming includes it in depth depth first search. A lot of words. Okay, so but it's just it's it's kind of cool that this framework just solves dag shortest paths without much work. I mean, we did a lot of work in shortest past to prove that this relation is true. Once you know it's true the algorithm part is pretty much free you just write down sort bot and and you're done.

Okay, so this brings us to in general at this point we we've seen two examples of dynamic programming I guess technically merge so you could think of as dynamic program but it doesn't actually reuse anything so that's not interesting. And indeed that gave us a very bad bound. We've definitely seen dag shortest paths and Fibonacci numbers as two interesting examples and and what the next remainder of this lecture and the next three lectures are going to be about is more about examples of dynamic programming and how you can use it to solve increasingly general problems. So far, we've just solved an easy problem and a problem we already knew how to solve. Let's go to a new problem which is is bowling here. So imagine n identical bowling pins, and I have a ball here which is approximately the same size as a as a bowling pin.

Okay, and if you're really good. I'm going to assume actually we're just going to assume that you're really good bowler. Now unfortunately, these bowling pins are online, and you're bowling from down down at infinity will call it so when you bowl you can only hit one pin, or two pins or zero pins. So if you bolt straight out of pin, you will just hit that one pin. And if you bowl in the middle of two pins you'll knock down two pins. This is this is your your model of bowling your model of computation here.

Now what makes this interesting is that the pins have values pin I has value. And this is obviously a toy problem. Right. So each of these, these bowling pins has some number on it. And, and the model so you're, you're at the carnival bowling each pin has different potentially different values. And the model is if you hit one pin, I, then you get vi points.

So that's, that's straightforward to make it interesting when you hit two pins, you get the product. So if if I hit two pins, it's always I, and I plus one for for some I, and you get, you get vi times vi plus one points. So this is this is the game, your play. And it doesn't really matter that this is a product product is just some weird function that's that's hard to imagine here. If you start this long enough you should convince yourself that the optimal solution is is probably to. So for each of these numbers, I could leave it singleton or pair it with its left neighbor or pair it with its right neighbor, but the Paris can't overlap because once I hit a pin, it's gone, it's knocked over disappears.

So because of these nine, which are, which are very high value what I'd probably like to do is hit both of them together those nines. So pair them up because nine times nine is 81. That's really big much better than hitting them individually or hitting nine times one or nine times two. One to one is kind of funny because it's actually better to hit them individually that will give you two points whereas if I'd paired them up I'd only get one point right. Two and minus five that seems bad negative 10 points because my goal is to maximize the score. Do you have to hit all the pins.

Let's say no you don't have to hit all the pins so I could skip the minus minus fives, but in fact here because they're adjacent minus five times minus five is good right that's 25 points. So you just play until you're tired whenever you decide to stop playing. How can I maximize your score. There are many variations of this game, all of them, basically any variation not literally every variation but many many variations of this problem can be solved quickly with dynamic programming So let's solve this one. Okay, so now we're really in algorithmic design mode we need to think about sort Bob, and in particular we need to think about what would the sub problems be here. And at this point, we don't have a lot of help so I should probably give you some tools.

If I want to solve a problem like this the input is a sequence of numbers it's a sequence data structure. Maybe it's an array of numbers which is our V array. So the general tool for sub problem design, which will cover most of the problems maybe all of the problems that we'll see in this class for dynamic programming is is here. So here's the trick if your input is a sequence here are some good sub problems to consider. We could do all prefixes so let's call the sequence x. We could do x prefix means up to a given I for all I, we could do all the suffixes x from I onward for all I, or we could do substrings which are the consecutive items from I to J.

So some string you have to start in some position and do all the things up to J so these are nice especially easy to express in Python notation. And these are great because they're polynomial. If I have n things if the length of my sequence x is n, then there are n prefixes technically I guess n plus one. So let's do theta and prefixes, there are theta and suffixes and there are theta and squared substrings because there's n, roughly and choices for I and J separately. I didn't write sub sequences because in fact, they are exponentially many sub sequences. It's two to the end for every item I could choose it or not so I don't want to parameterize.

I don't want, I don't want my sub problems to be the sub sequences because that's guaranteed. You're guaranteed to get an exponential number of sub problems which is bad right. We'd like to balance the number of sub problems by by polynomial. So these are three natural ways to get polynomial balance now prefixes and suffixes are obviously better because there's fewer of them linear instead of quadratic, and usually almost every problem you encounter prefixes and sub fixes are equally good it doesn't matter which one you choose. So, maybe you'd like to think of. Well, okay, we'll get just just choose whichever is more comfortable for you really.

Sometimes it's it's not enough and we'll have to go to substrings that won't be for another lecture to today, I claim to you that prefixes or suffixes are enough to solve the bowling problem. So we're going to think about, we're going to think about, I prefer suffixes, usually because I like to work from left to right from the beginning to end. So we're going to think, we're going to think of a suffix to the bowling pins suffix of the bowling pins I should say. So what is the sub problem on a suffix well a natural version is just to solve the original problem bowling. How do I maximize my score, if I were given these pins. Suppose the pins to the left of I didn't exist how would I maximize my score on the remaining pins, or for this suffix given the four middle pins, what would I do.

And there's some weird sub problems here if I just gave you the last pin, what would you do. Nothing that's that's clearly different from what I would do globally here. But if I, but I, but I claim if I can solve all suffixes, I can solve my original problem, because one of the suffixes is the whole sequence so let's do it. So here's our dynamic program. The, the sub problems are suffixes so all right, be a by is the maximum score we could get possible with our starting if we started a game with pins I plus one up to n minus one, which is a suffix of the pins. Very important, whenever you write a dynamic program to define what your sub problems are.

Don't just say how to compute them but first say, what's the goal of the sub problem. This is a common mistake to forget to state what you're trying to do. So now I've defined be a by now what's the original thing I'm trying to solve. You can also put in sort about you can put the earlier because then actually spell sort. The original problem we're trying to solve is is be of, oh, I'm sorry be of zero, because that is all of the pins, the suffix starting at zero is everything right so so if we can solve that we're done. Next is our for relate.

This is the test of did I get the sub problems right is is whether I can write a recurrence relation right. So let's try to do it, we want to compute be a by so we have pin I and then all the remaining pins. And the big idea here is just to think about that the nice thing about suffixes is if I take off something from the beginning, I still have a suffix. Remember my goal is to take my sub problem which is suffix starting at I and reduce it to a smaller sub problem which means smaller suffix. So I'd like to clip off one or two items here. The remaining problem will be one of my sub problems, I'll be able to recursively call be of something smaller than I know be of something larger than I will be a smaller sub sequence because we're starting later.

Okay, so what can I do. Well the idea is just to look at pin I and think, well, what can I do to my pin I, I could not hit it ever with a ball I could skip it that's one option. Well, if I skip pin I that leaves the remaining pins which is just a smaller suffix. So that's be a by plus one. I'm going to write a, a max out here, right because I'm going to write a max because I'd like to of course, maximize my score. And one of the options is forget about pin I just solve the rest.

Another option is I throw a ball and I exactly hit pin I that's one thing I could do. And it would leave exactly the same remainder so another option is be of I plus one plus vi. Why would I prefer that. Well, if, if vi is negative, I prefer this other but if vi is positive I'd actually prefer the other right. So you can figure out which is better just locally, but then there's another thing I can do which is maybe I hit the pin in a pair with some other pin. So there's no pin to the left of it, we're assuming we only have the suffix.

And so the other thing I can do is throw a ball and hit I together with I plus one, and then I get the product. Now what pins remain, I plus two on right still suffix. So if I remove one or two items of course I, I still get a suffix in this case be of I plus two. And then the number of pins that I add on our vi times vi plus one. So this is a max of three things. So how long does it take me to compute it.

I claim constant time. If I don't count the time it takes to compute these other sub problems which are smaller because they're smaller suffixes, further to the right, then I'm doing a couple of additions, product max. These are nice numbers and I'll assume that they live in the W bit word, because we're only doing constant size products. Okay, so that's good. So this takes constant, constant non recursive work. How many sub problems are there.

Well it suffixes so it's a linear number of sub problems and so the time I'm going to end up needing is the number of sub problems and times the non recursive work I do per sub problem, which is constant. And so this is linear time. Great. And I just skipped ahead and didn't finish the robot so there's another T which is to make sure that there's a topological order and that it is in decreasing I order, or I might write that as a for loop for I equals and and minus one. This is the order that I would compute my problems because the suffix starting at n is the empty suffix, the suffix starting at zero that's the one I actually want to compute that's the final suffix, I should be computing. And then we have a be for base case which is that first case be of n equals zero, because there's no pins so I didn't get any points.

Sad. Okay, so this is it. We just take these components, plug them into our recursive memoized algorithm, and we have a linear time algorithm. I want to briefly mention a different way you could plug in those pieces which is called bottom up dynamic programming. Let's let's do this for the bowling example. Let me start with the base case be of n equals zero.

But now it's an assignment I'm going to do for loop from the topological order for I equals n and minus one to zero. Now I'm going to do the relation be of I equals max of be of I plus one and be of I plus one plus bi and be of I plus two plus bi vi plus one. Technically this only works. If I is strictly less than n minus one. So I should have an if I is less than minus one for the last part because I can only do. I can only hit two pins.

If there's at least two pins left right and then return be of zero. So what I just did is a transformation from our sort bot template into a non recursive algorithm, a for loop algorithm, where I wrote my base case first then I did my time. I did my topological order then I did my relation and at the end the original problem right and provided you can write your topological order as some for loops is actually a great way to write down a dynamic program as a code as code if I were going to implement this algorithm I would write it this way because this is this is super fast no recursive calls just one for loop. In fact this is almost a trivial algorithm it's amazing that this solves the bowling problem it's in some sense considering every possible strategy I could for bowling these pins. What we're using is is what we like to call local brute force where when we think about pin I we look at all the possible things I could do to pin I here there's really only only three options of what I could do. Now normally if I tried all the options for pin I and then looked at the options for I plus one and I plus two and so on that would be exponential it'd be three times three times three.

That's bad but because I can reuse these sub problems. It turns out to only be linear time it's it's really quite cool dynamic programming is essentially an idea of using local brute force and by defining a small number of sub problems up front as long as I stay within those sub problems as long as I'm always ready to do that. So long as I'm always recursive recursing into this polynomial space, I end up only doing polynomial work, even though I'm in some sense exploring exponentially more options. And this is because what I do to this pin doesn't depend too much on what I do to a pin. Much later. There's there's a lot of intuition going on here for for what when dynamic programming works.

I got a lot more examples of that coming up and I just want to mention the intuition for how to write a recurrence like this is to think about in the case of suffixes you always want to think about the first item or maybe the first couple of items the case of prefixes. You always think about the last item and for substrings, it could be any item maybe maybe in the middle. I'm from the middle of a substring I get to substrings so I can recurse here or or in general what we want to do is identify some feature of the solution that if we knew the feature, we would be done. We would reduce to a smaller sub problem. In this case we just say well what are all the possible things I could do to the first pin. There are three options if I knew which option it was I would be done I could recurse and do my addition.

Now I don't know which thing I want to do so I just try them all and take the max and if you're maximizing you take the max of course if you're minimizing you take them in. Sometimes you. Yeah, okay anyway, there there might be some combination function for optimization problems where you're trying to maximize or minimize something like shortest pass you're trying to minimize we put them in here. Usually it's a minor max, and this is extremely powerful all you need to do the hard part is this inspired design part where you say what do I need to know that would let me solve my sub problem. And if you can identify that and the number of choices for what you need to know is polynomial, then you will be able to get a polynomial dynamic program that's that's the intuition here. You'll see a lot more in in the next coming lectures.

Okay.