Okay, okay, let's get started. 12th lecture of 381 here. This is our second lecture talking about way to graphs and in particular way to shortest paths. algorithms for those last lecture we talked about weighted graphs. This is a kind of generalization of what we mean by distance in an unweighted graph instead of each edge having a way of one. Essentially, we we generalize that to be any integer. And last time we showed how to solve single single source shortest path in a graph that doesn't have cycles, even if it has zero or negative weights in linear time using an algorithm called drag relaxation. We also showed in that lecture how in linear time, if we are given the shortest path weights to all the things reachable in finite or or with shortest path distance that's finite, we can construct those shortest paths trees shortest path trees from those weights in linear time. So this is motivating why we're not really going to talk about parent pointers for the next couple of lectures we're just going to concentrate on the shortest path weights. And so today, we're going to be talking about our most general algorithm will be showing for solving single source shortest paths, and in particular, in in graphs that could contain cycles and could have negative weights. Joe. So just to recap our little roadmap here, let's pull her up. Single source shortest paths in in linear time. Last time we discussed another linear time algorithm, drag relaxation, as I mentioned, and today we are going to be talking about Belman Ford, which isn't limited to cyclic graphs in particular, there could be negative weight cycles in our graphs. If it has cycles if it has negative weights, the worry is that we could have negative weight cycles in which case there, if a negative weight cycle is reachable from our source, then the vertices in that cycle and anything reachable from that cycle will potentially have an unbounded number of edges you need to go through. There's not a bound on the number of edges for shortest path, because I could just keep going around that cycle as many times as I want and get a shorter path. And so we assign those distances to be minus infinity. So that's what we're going to do today in Belman Ford in particular what we're going to do is compute our shortest path distances the shortest path weights for every vertex in our graph, setting the ones that are not reachable to infinity. And the ones that are reachable through a negative weight cycle to minus infinity. Then all the other ones we were going to set to a finite weight. And another thing that we might want is if there's a negative weight cycle in the graph, let's return one. So those are two kinds of things that we're trying to solve in today's lecture. But before we do that, let's warm up with two short exercises. The first one exercise one, given an undirected graph, given an undirected graph g return whether g contains a negative weight cycle. Do you have an idea of how we can solve this in linear time, actually. In fact, we can do it in order E. No, yes, yes, reachable from s. I guess let's just say let's just say negative weight cycle at all. Not in the context of single source shortest paths. There's an interesting fact about undirected graphs. If you have a negative weight edge in an undirected graph, I can just move back and forth along the edge that's a cycle of length to or I guess three vertices back to where we came from there. There's a negative weight because I'm just traversing that weight over and over and over again. And so the question of single source shortest paths of finding negative weights is not particularly interesting in an undirected case. What I can do is just for every negative weight edge, undirected edge in my graph. I can just find the readability from the vertices the endpoints of that edge and label them as minus basically if the connected component containing s has a negative weight edge, then everything in the graph is accessible from a negative weight cycle. This is not such an interesting problem. And so we're going to restrict our discussion today to to directed graphs. So it so so this is if and only if exists negative weight edge. Okay, so exercise to kind of a little preview for what's to come. I'm actually not going to show you an algorithm directly that meets Belman forward running time V V times E. What instead I'm going to show you is an algorithm that solves single source shortest paths. Anyway, so so given an algorithm a solves a single source shortest path in order V times V plus E time. Okay, so what is that that's V squared plus V times E that's close to what this V times E is that's what we're going to show you. That's what I'm going to show you. If I had such an algorithm, can anyone tell me a single source shortest path algorithm, how we can use this algorithm to solve single source shortest paths in just V times E time. Okay, show how to solve SSSP in in the order V times E. This is a little tricky, right? It's kind of related to the difference of what we had between the reachability problem and the single source shortest paths problem that we saw last lecture. When when are these asymptotically different in their upper bound is when V is asymptotically larger than E, it can actually have at most E plus one vertices because otherwise it wouldn't be connected. So what can what what we can do if we had such an algorithm, we could first when we're when we're giving our graph explore everything in the graph using BFS or DFS, find all the things reachable from S and then just throw away everything else. Now I have a graph for which V is asymptotically no bigger than E, and then we can use this algorithm to solve single source shortest paths in V times E time. Alright, so those those are warm ups. That's, that's our goal. We need to find an algorithm for single source shortest paths and general graphs graphs with potentially potentially graphs with cycles and negative weights and solve this in V times linear kind of time. That makes sense. Okay, so first before we get to the algorithm we're going to discuss a little bit about simple short about shortest paths in general. The problem here is negative weights. How do we find if we had negative weight cycles, there seems to be these problems because we could have minus infinities in our deltas. But if we didn't have negative weights, I'd like to assert to you that our shortest paths, even if there are negative weights are going to be simple they won't repeat vertices. That's the first thing I'm going to show you. Simple shortest paths. Okay, so, so claim I'm going to give, we're going to go through lots, lots of claims today. If my shortest path distance from S to some vertex is finite, meaning it's not infinite or minus infinity. There's, there's some finite value there exists a shortest path, a shortest S to V path that is simple. And remember simple means not going through a vertex more than once. All right, how, how are we going to prove this. Well, consider if this claim was not true, right. If every shortest path contained a cycle essentially it repeated a vertex, then my path looks something something like this right. I mean, there's, there's some vertices along. I, and then I go to V. So we have S our source. We have some cycle I repeat some vertex we'll call this C. Now, what do we know about about our path. We know it has it's it's a shortest path and it has finite weight. So in particular our path our delta distance is not minus infinity. What do I know about the weight of the cycle. It can't be negative right because if it was negative I could keep going around our cycle and and this would have a non finite weight shortest path distance from S right. So I know this is it can't be negative so it must be zero or positive. But if it's zero or positive and this is a shortest path. Then I could remove it and now I have a new path with one fewer cycle. I can just keep doing this to create a simple path. So that checks out. So that's interesting. If it's simple what do we know about the number of edges in simple shortest paths. How many could there possibly be how long in number of edges could a simple shortest path be. If I can't repeat vertices I can have it I can have at most vertices on my simple path, which means I can use that most V minus one edges right this is called fence posting this idea of fence posting. So simple paths have at most V minus one edges that's that's a nice little thing I'd like to box off. That's a nice property so while a shortest path here could have an infinite number of edges. If the shortest path distance is finite. I know I only have to check past the use up to V minus one edges. In particular this is is finitely bounded in terms of the number of paths I have to consider. I don't know if it's exponential potentially but at least it's finite. The other way I potentially had to check every possible path of which there could be infinite if they're if they're cycles in my graph right. Okay so I so I have no idea. What if I could find shortest path distances by limiting the number of edges I go through. So not the full shortest path distance from S to V, but let's limit the number of edges I'm allowed to go through and let's talk about those shortest path distances just among the paths that have at most a certain number of edges. I'm going to call this K edge distance. And I'm just going to provide a little notation here instead of having a delta I'll have a delta K here. This this means how many edges I'm limited by. And S to V is the weight of a shortest S to V path using at most K edges. And these notations seem somewhat symmetric if I were able to compute this thing for V minus one, then for all the vertices then if the distance is finite, then I'll have successfully computed the real shortest path distances of our statement right. Now that doesn't mean that if this is, it doesn't mean the other way if this is minus infinity if the shortest path distances is minus infinity. It doesn't say anything about what the K edge distance is. The shortest path using at most V minus one vertices using at most V minus one edges would be whatever this is. But really the shortest path length needs to consider an infinite number of edges so it doesn't really tell us much about that. But for finite ones it does. It works well and so if we are able to compute this thing for K equals V minus one in a graph that doesn't contain negative weight cycles we'd be done. I claim to you a stronger statement that if the shortest path using at most V edges from S to V is less than strictly less than delta of V minus one. Basically, this is the shortest path distance from any simple path and possibly ones that also contain cycles, but definitely includes all the simple paths. If there's a shorter path to my vertex that goes through more than V minus one edges that this path can't be simple because it goes through a vertex more than once otherwise it would be included in the distance set. So if this is the case and I found a shorter path to be that uses the edges, that path can't be simple which means that path or some path there contains a negative weight cycle. So if this is true then I know that the real shortest path distance from S to V must be minus infinity. I'm going to call that vertex a witness. If we can find a vertex that has this property, I mean I haven't shown you how to compute these things yet but if we can find such a vertex V that certifies that there is a negative weight cycle in our graph. So I'm going to call V as a witness. So if this property is true, it's a witness and it definitely has this. It is possible. You think I'm going to claim to you that it's possible that a vertex could have minus infinite distance but not have this property halt. I could probably give you an example. I don't have one off the top of my head, but that is possible. But you could imagine there might be no path going to a vertex on a negative weight cycle that goes through V, exactly V edges. It might go through more edges, a shorter one. So this equation would be inequality and would not certify that this is true. But I claim to you if a vertex has this property, if its shortest path distance is minus infinite, minus infinite, then it must be reachable from a witness. So that's the claim. If delta SV is minus infinity, then V is reachable from a witness, reachable from a vertex that has this property. And if it's reachable from something that has minus infinity shortest pathway, then I can take that path, go to my reachable vertex and that's also a minus infinite path. Okay, so how do we prove that? Well, let's consider, I'm going to state a somewhat stronger statement that will prove instead. It suffices to prove that every negative weight cycle contains a witness. If we are to prove that, then every vertex with this property is reachable from a negative weight cycle by definition. So if we can prove every negative weight cycle contains a witness, then every vertex reachable from one of those witnesses, in particular reachable from the negative weight cycle, has shortest distance minus infinity, and that should prove the claim, right? This thing has to be reachable from a negative weight cycle. And so if we prove negative weight cycle contains witnesses, then all of these vertices are reachable from a witness. Okay, I was confusing myself that for a second, but we got it. So let's consider a negative weight cycle. Here is a negative weight cycle. This will be, we call this C. Okay, let's call this C. All of some of the edges in this thing, the weights have a negative weight. And I'm going to have a little bit of notation. If I have a vertex V here, I'm going to say that it's predecessor in the cycle. We're going to call that V prime. There's just some notation for you. So if I have computed these shortest path distances to every vertex in my graph, shortest path distance going throughout most V vertices, and the shortest path distance going throughout most V minus one vertices, then I know this thing holds. Delta V going from S to V for any vertex in my cycle can't be bigger than delta V minus one from S to V prime, plus the weight going from the predecessor to my vertex. Why is that? Think about that for a second. Why is that? Because this is the weight of some some vertex. This is the weight, the shortest path distance to my predecessor using one fewer edge. And so this in particular is the weight of some path that uses the edges. So if the shortest such path distance, this has to upper bound it at most, at least at most. So this is just by triangle inequality. Okay, so now what we can say is let's take this equation summed over over all vertices in my cycle. I'm just going to add a summation here of all vertices in my cycle of this whole thing. Summation of delta V SV equals or less than or equal to some of V in C of delta V minus one V prime. And then I'm going to sum over all the weights in my cycle V and C. These are these are the sum of the weights in my cycle. Well, what do I know about this cycle? This is just the weight of C. And what do I know about the weight of the cycle? It's negative, right? So so this is less than zero, which means we need a strict equality. But if the sum of all the left side is strictly than the sum of all the right side of what we're looking at on on the slide here. We can't have none of the vertices in my graph, not satisfying this property. If all of them are not witnesses, then this thing is bigger than the left, right? At least as big as the right for every vertex in my cycle, which is a contradiction. So the claim holds, if we have a negative infinite shortest path distance, then V is reachable from a witness. So it suffices for us to find all the witnesses, find all the vertices reachable from the witness, mark them as minus infinity. Okay, does that make sense? So now we are finally going to get to our algorithm, Bellman Ford. And what I'm going to show you today is a little different from what's normally presented as Bellman Ford, the original Bellman Ford algorithm, just something a little different. And because it does something a little different, which we'll talk about at the end, it's a little harder to analyze. I'm going to show you a modification that's a little easier to analyze and that has this nice property that we're going to be able to use the algorithm to give us negative weight cycle if it exists. So we're going to say this is maybe a modified Bellman Ford here. And the idea is to make a vertex, to make many versions of a vertex. And I want this version of a vertex to correspond to whether I came here using zero edges, one edge, two edge, three edges. I have a different version of the vertex for each one of these for a path going throughout most a certain number of edges. Okay, so this idea is called graph duplication. And this is a very common technique for solving graph related problems because essentially what I get to do is I get to store information. If I'm having different versions of a vertex, I can have that vertex correspond to reaching that vertex in a different state. So what we're going to do, the idea is to make v plus one levels basically duplicate vertices in our graph, where vertex vk in level k represents reaching vertex v using at most k edges. Okay. So this definition seems similar to what we were doing before if we have vertices that have this property then their shortest path is this new graph in this new graph might correspond to the k edge distances. And really the name of this of the game here is to compute these two for every vertex because then we can then if Delta is finite, then this guy will be the length of our shortest path. And if they're different, that will be a witness and we can explore from it. So, and if we can connect edges from one level to only higher levels basically levels with a higher k, then this graph is going to be a DAG. Right, like, whoa, this, this is cool. Why is this cool, because we saw how to solve single source shortest path in a DAG and linear time. Now, now this graph that we are going to construct is going to have v plus one levels. So, so our graph kind of explodes v times. We're going to do that in a second. I'm going to be more precise with what I mean there but if we're multiplying our graph v plus one times, then the size of our graph is now v times larger. Now that doesn't that that's not so hard to believe but if we made our graph v times larger and we ran a shortest path algorithm in linear time with respect to that graph, then that graph has something like v times v plus e size. That maybe looks familiar to us that's the SSSP running time. So if we can find an algorithm that runs in that running time, we can get down to v times e. Okay, so let's try to do that. Here's the transformation I'm going to show you. I'm going to show you first with an example. Here's an example of a directed graph that does contain a negative white cycle. Can you find it here? So, b, bcd right has has weight minus four plus three minus one. So it has a minus two total weight. So that's a negative weight cycle. So in order to take shortest paths from a, I will want to say at the end of my algorithm this better be zero and and all other vertices better be minus infinity. That's what I want in my algorithm. So what's my algorithm going to be? I'm going to make v plus one copies of this graph shown here this graph and I'm going to kind of stretch it out. Right. Okay, so here I have I have the zero one two three four there are four vertices in my graph right. So this is one two three four five copies of my graph. I have a version of vertex a for each one of those copies, a version of vertex B for each one of those copies, C and D, etc. So I have this nice grid of vertices and I'm not going to put any edges within a layer within a level, because then I mean this this graph has cycles, and I don't want cycles in my other graph. So what I'm going to do instead is for every edge in my original graph, for example the edge from a to B, I'm going to connect it to the, to the B in the next level. So a not is connected to be one with an edge weight of minus five, just like in my original graph, and I'm going to do that for every edge in my graph and I'm going to repeat that all down all the way right. So in addition, I'm going to add zero weight edge from a not to a one, or from every vertex, all the way down the line. These are zero weight edges corresponding to, I'm not going to traverse an edge I'm just going to stay at this vertex that's going to allow us to simulate this most K edges condition, right. Now if you take a look at passing this graph from a not our starting vertex clearly none of the other vertices in that level are reachable from a not just as we want, because the shortest path distance to any of these vertices using at most zero edges should be infinite I can't get there in zero edges, but then any path in in this graph uses at most K edges, what using at most K edges is going to correspond to a path from a not to a vertex in that level, of course the corresponding level. So for example, if I was looking for paths to be using at most three edges, any path a path from a not to be three in the larger graph would correspond to a path in our smaller graph that uses at most three edges so let's find such a path. So in the right graph going from a not to to be one stay at be one. That's a path using fewer than three edges or at most three edges but there's another path here, going from a a one a two to be. Okay, so that's that's not as interesting that's a simple path. I might have more than one path in here corresponding to a path in my smaller left graph, but my claim is that any path in the left graph does correspond to a path in the right graph. So what's a path of length. Three, that's non trivial. How about so a to see to D to be a to see to do to be yeah that's a path. And basically because I constructed this so that the edges always moved from level to level. As I traverse these edges I always change levels. My original graph on the left doesn't have an edge from a to a. I'm just using these edges in the larger graph on the right to correspond to remember I'm not taking an edge I'm just staying there first date. And that's what's going to allow me to get this at most K edges. This is the graph construct hopefully you understand that we made these v layers and a vertex we made v copies of every vertex and connected them using edges this way. Okay, so first step of Bellman Ford is to construct this graph. So Bellman Ford construct G prime as described previously right we just talked about that. It has how many vertices v times v plus one by v times v plus one vertices and how many edges well I have one edge for outgoing edge for for each vertex corresponding to just staying at the same place. So that's v squared edges. And then I have the edges for every edge in my graph. So, so this is the number of vertices and v times v plus v times e. This is v v plus e. All right, cool. So that's how many edges I have. So constructed in that way it's a deck. If we only have edges going to increasing levels, then this thing can't have cycles because otherwise, that would mean there would be an edge pointing backwards and we we don't construct any of those. So we construct this graph G prime. We can do that in linear time with respect to these things. I just go through all the edges I make edges and I make my vertices. It doesn't take anything I just do it naively right I can do that in v times v plus e asymptotically. Now I run dag relaxation our nice algorithm we had last time. And from there it, I'm going to say, s not our source, our source vertex single source shortest paths. So, so I compute delta of s not to vk for all k in zero to v. That's what the single single source shortest path does. It computes for me this distance from my source at some source to to every other vertex in the graph. So I'm going to set the vertex v set the thing I'm going to return d value s to v equal to the shortest path distance I got from dag relaxation to a particular vertex v minus one. Why am I doing this I'm setting it to be the shortest path distance to the guy in the second to last row here on our graph, or the column in my in my modified graph. The hope is that this distance in my dag corresponds to the distance to be using at most v minus one edges. So that's the claim the that's a claim we're going to prove here in in just a second. We claim delta s not vk equals delta k, the k edge distance from s to v. That's what we want to claim. And then what what would that mean that would mean that I'm correctly setting the shortest path distance for all vertices whose distances are finite. I mean I said I set values, I guess to things where they're they're not finite where they're minus infinity also but in particular I set the ones correctly if they're finite. So the last thing we need to do is deal with our minus infinity vertices be because we've computed a value for k equals v equals v minus one. And if that claim over there is true. If our previous claim was true, then the shortest path distances are the same as these k and shortest path distances here, and we can just for every vertex we we compare those things. If this is satisfied, we've got a witness right. Okay, so for each witness you and v where delta s not UV is is less than strictly s not UV minus one. That's the definition of a witness here close and then then parentheses right. Then for each vertex V reachable from you set d of s v equal to minus infinity. That's the end of our algorithm. Basically, I'm looking for all the witnesses for each witness. I find all the vertices reachable from it and set it to minus infinity just as we argued before. Okay, so it remains then to prove our claim here. How do we prove this claim. This gets a little bit mass heavy. But we can induct on on K is this true for K equals zero. Yeah, we we kind of already argued it earlier when we were talking about our initialization step of what dag relaxation does. So the base case so so induct on base case K equals zero check right that's that's all good. Now, we in our inductive step. Let's take a look at the shortest path distance from s not to V of K prime for some K prime. And the assumption is the inductive hypothesis is that this distance is the K edge distance for all K less than K prime. Well, kind of by definition of shortest path. This is the minimum overall incoming vertices of the shortest path from s not to you have K prime minus one, plus the weight of the edge from you have K prime minus to V K prime for all UK prime minus one in the adjacencies, the incoming adjacencies of V K prime. Okay, so what does this mean. I'm just saying that in my graph G prime, a shortest path to this vertex needs to go through to go first through some vertex in the layer before it. And in particular I'm only concerned I'm only connected to things adjacent to me. That's all this is saying, I have to go through that vertex and take some shortest path to one of our previous vertices. And then the adjacencies I constructed them to be similar to the adjacencies in my original graph, in addition to one edge coming from my original vertex from vertex V. So this is just the same minimum of this set delta s not same thing, plus WV, I'm sorry, W UV for all you in the adjacent incoming adjacencies of my original vertex. In addition to one more item, what is the other term. These are all of the things corresponding to my incoming edges in my original thing, but I also have one edge coming from the V before it. So I'm going to union union this with delta s not V of K prime minus one, then by induction that thing must be the edge shortest paths using K minus one vertices, and then that's just the statement of what the shortest path should be using at most K prime edges, going from s to V. So those things are the same as we claimed right check. All right, then, then it's not such it's kind of a trivial leap then to say that at the end of Belman Ford, the things that we return are the shortest path distances, because if they're finite we set them to their true shortest path distance. And then minus infinity are invariant means that these things corresponded to exactly our claim over here it's a witness, and then finding all the vertices reachable from those witnesses, we set all of the infinite ones to be minus infinity, as desired. Okay, so anyways, what is the running time of this thing then well we had to construct our graph. So we had to take that time, we ran dag relaxation that takes the same amount of time for every vertex we did order V work at work. Then for each new witness, how many could there be at most V right checking the reachability of each vertex back and we done and how long order E time, because we don't need to consider the things that aren't connected to the witness. So this thing takes order V times E work so we're upper bounded by this time it took to construct the original graph, and by the claim we had before that takes V times E time. Okay, so that's Belman Ford. I'm just going to leave you with. Excuse me I'm just going to leave you with two low nuggets here. First, the shortest path. If for any witness let's say I have a witness here, do I have a witness here. I'm going to fill all these in. Okay, so but is there vertex on this cycle on our cycle that goes through who has the shortest path that goes through all four vertices, the smaller than any other. Okay, I can go from a to C to be to D to be to see on our left graph. So I actually have a shorter path for vertex B right a to be to see to D to be. Yes. That's a path of length for a four edges. This has a shorter path than any path that has fewer edges. In fact, there's only one other past to be using fewer than four. There's two other paths. So the path that has weight minus five and one path the path AC DB that has weight nine minus one is eight. Whereas the path ABC DB minus five minus four three minus one has minus 10 plus three is minus seven, which is shorter than minus five. B and D is a witness. And if we actually take a look at that path through the larger graph, let's do it. Going from a to be to see to D and back to be, we see that there's a negative weight cycle in this graph, B to see to D to be. And indeed, that's always the case for our witness. So, so fun. Love. I don't know I love when things come together like this and you can see them so. So that is Bellman Ford and I will see you have stopped screen share. We'll see you next time.