Okay, so now in this lecture we have another cool graph algorithm or problem. Actually we'll have two algorithms. The problem is called minimum spanning tree. You can probably guess from the title what it's trying to do. We'll see two algorithms for doing it. Both of them are in the category of greedy algorithms, which is something we've seen a couple times actually starting with lecture one.

The idea is to always make greedy choices beginning, yeah, at the beginning, meaning the choice is locally best. For right now it seems like a good thing to do, but maybe in the future it will screw you over. If you have a correct greedy algorithm, you prove that it won't actually screw you over. That's the problem, minimum spanning tree. Okay, let's have a minimum spanning tree. Spanning tree means it contains all the vertices.

So implicit here I guess is subtree or subgraph. So you're given a graph. You want a spanning tree of that graph. It's going to be a tree that lives inside of a graph. So we're going to take some of the edges of G, make a tree out of them, make a connected acyclic graph, and that tree should hit all the vertices in G. So this is going to be a subset of the edges or subgraph.

Those edges should form a tree and hit all vertices of G. Okay, if I just said they should form a tree, then I could say, well, I take, I'll take no edges and here's a tree with just one vertex. That's not interesting. You want basically the vertex set of the tree to be the same as the vertex set of the graph. That's the spanning property, okay? But if you still want it to be a tree, you want it to be connected and you want it to be acyclic.

Okay, now if G is disconnected, that's impossible. And for that, you could define a spanning forest to be like a maximal thing. Like, anyway, we'll focus on special cases where G is connected. That's the interesting case. And so we can get a spanning tree. Okay, so what is minimum spanning tree problem?

We're given a way to graph, just like last time, with shortest paths. We have an edge weight function, W, giving me a real number, say, for every edge. And we want to find a spanning tree of minimum total weight. Okay, so I'm going to define the weight of a tree, T, to be the sum over all edges in T, because I'm viewing a spanning tree as a set of edges of the weight of that edge. Okay, so pretty much what you would expect. It's a relatively simple problem, but it's not easy to find an algorithm.

You need to prove a lot to make sure that you really find the right tree, right? I guess the really naive algorithm here would be try all spanning trees, compute the weight of each spanning tree, and then return the minimum. That sounds reasonable. That's correct, but it's bad, right? Because it can be exponential. Sometimes those brute force type algorithms don't really do great on the runtimes.

So today we're going to get a polynomial algorithm. In fact, we'll get almost linear time algorithm, almost as fast as Dijkstra's algorithm, but we can't use Dijkstra's algorithm. There's no shortest path here. So two lectures ago, the dynamic programming lecture, we saw an example where we tried to do greedy and it gave the wrong answer. So we fell back on dynamic programming. Today, we're going to try to do dynamic programming.

It's going to fail and we're going to fall back on greedy. Okay, so we're going to take a reverse approach, but the way it's going to fail is we're going to get exponential time initially. And then the greedy will let us get polynomial time. So this is actually a bit unusual. I would say more typically dynamic programming can solve anything, but with n to the seventh running time, something slow, and then you apply greedy and you get down to n or n log n running time. So that's more common.

But today we're going to go from exponential down to polynomial. Okay, that's pretty nice. So let me tell you a bit about greedy algorithms theory, so to speak. If your problem can be solved by greedy algorithm, usually you can prove two properties about that algorithm. One of them is called optimal, optimal substructure. And the other is called the greedy choice property.

Optimal substructure should be familiar because it's essentially an encapsulation of dynamic programming. Greedy algorithms are in some case a special form of dynamic programming. So this is saying something like if you can solve subproblems optimally, smaller subproblems or whatever, then you can solve your original subproblem. And this may happen recursively. That's essentially what makes a recurrence work for dynamic programming. And with dynamic programming, for this to be possible, we need to guess some feature of the solution.

For example, any minimum spanning tree, maybe you guess one of the edges that's in the right answer. And then once you do that, you can reduce it to some other subproblem. And if you can solve those subproblems, you combine them and get an optimal solution to your original thing. So this is a hopefully familiar property. I don't usually think of it this way for dynamic programming, but that's essentially what we're doing via guessing. But with greedy algorithms, we're not going to guess.

We're just going to be greedy. Eat the largest cookie. Anyway, you know what I'm saying. And so the greedy choice property, number two here, this says that eating the largest cookie is actually a good thing to do. If we keep making locally optimal choices, we'll end up with a globally optimal solution. This is something that you wouldn't expect to be true in general, but it is true for a minimum spanning tree.

And it's true for also a handful of other problems. This is sort of general theory, but I'm actually going to have a theorem like this for minimum spanning tree. And yep. So this is a prototype, but most of today is all about minimum spanning tree. And for minimum spanning tree, neither of these is very obvious. So I'm just going to show you these theorems.

They're very easy to prove, in fact, but finding them is the tricky part. And first, optimal substructure. So here, I'm going to think like a dynamic program. Okay, let's suppose that we know an edge that's in our solution. Suppose we know an edge that lives in a minimum spanning tree. We could guess that we're not going to, but we could.

I should mention I didn't say this graph is undirected. A minimum spanning tree doesn't quite make sense with directed graphs. There are other versions of the problem, but here the graph is undirected. Okay. So this is an unordered set UV. And there are possibly many minimum spanning trees.

There could be many solutions with the same weight. For example, if all the edges have weight one, every spanning tree is minimum because every spanning tree has exactly n minus one edges. But let's suppose we know an edge that's guaranteed to be in some minimum spanning tree, at least one. What I would like to do is take this case. So we've identified some edge in the graph E that lives in some minimum spanning tree. Did I draw this?

Here we go. We drew it out. The wiggly lines here are the tree, just little scribble lines. There are some edges in here. I didn't want to draw too many of them because it will get ugly because the minimum spanning tree is a tree. If I delete E from the tree, then I get two components.

Every edge I remove, I'm minimally connected. So if I delete an edge, I disconnect into two parts. So I've gone that as a left circle and a right circle. It's just a general way to think about a tree. Now there are other unused edges in this picture. Who knows where they live, right?

What I would like to do is somehow simplify this graph and get a smaller problem. Say a graph with fewer edges. I don't actually know where all these edges are, but what I'd like to do is I'm supposing I know where E is and that's my edge. That's an edge in my minimum spanning tree. So how could I get rid of it then? Merge the two nodes into one, right?

This is what we call contracting the edge. It just means merge the endpoints. Merge U and V. Here. Merge U and V. So a new version of the graph.

So we have U and V, right? We've got a label. We have a new vertex here, which is UV. Or you can think of this as a set UV. We don't really need to keep track of the names. And whatever edges we had before, you're going to have the same edges here.

Okay. Collapse U and V. The edge E just disappears. So overall you can think of this as a recurrence in a dynamic program. And let's look at that dynamic programming. It won't be a very good dynamic program, but it's a starting point.

This is conceptually what we want to do. We're going to guess an edge E that's in a minimum spanning tree. Then we're going to contract that edge. Then we're going to recurse, find the minimum spanning tree on what remains. And then we find the minimum spanning tree. And we want to decontract the edge, put it back, put the graph back the way it was, and then add E to the minimum spanning tree.

This is a good algorithm. If we start with an edge that's guaranteed to be in some minimum spanning tree, call it a safe edge, and we contract and we find a minimum spanning tree of the original graph. So this does give us a correct algorithm. Now this algorithm is bad again from a complexity standpoint. The running time is going to be exponential. The number of sub problems we might have to consider here is all subsets of edges.

There's no particular way because at every step we're guessing an arbitrary edge in the graph, there's no structure. We can't say, well, it's the first K edges or some substring of edges. It's just going to be some subset of edges. There's exponentially many subsets, two to the E. So this is exponential. But we're going to make it polynomial by removing the guessing.

This is actually a really good prototype for a greedy algorithm. If instead of guessing, trying all the edges, if we could find a good edge to choose that's guaranteed to be in a minimum spanning tree, then we could actually follow this procedure. And this would be like an iterative algorithm. If you don't guess, you correctly choose a good, you take the biggest cookie, you contract it, and then you repeat that process over and over. That would be a prototype for a greedy algorithm, and that's what's going to work. There's different ways to choose this greedy edge, and we're going to get two different algorithms accordingly, but that's where we're going.

So we've talked about optimal substructure a little bit. The more interesting property is going to be the greedy choice property. This is where the action is for greedy algorithms, and this is usually the heart of proving greedy algorithms correctness. We don't yet have a greedy algorithm, but we're thinking about it. We need a way to intelligently choose an edge E. And I'm going to give you a whole bunch of ways to intelligently choose an edge E.

So here's a powerful lemma, and we're going to make it even stronger in a moment. So I'm going to introduce a notion of a cut. That's going to be similar to what we had before in as much as our picture here. I'm going to look at some set of vertices. S is a subset of the vertices, and that leaves in the graph everything else. The right side would be V minus S.

So there's some vertices over on the left, some vertices over on the right. There's some edges that are purely inside one side of the cut. And then what I'm interested in are the edges that cross the cut. Whatever they look like, these edges, if an edge has one vertex in V and one vertex not in V, I'll call that edge a crossing edge. So let's suppose that E is at least, is a least weight edge crossing the cut. So let's say, be specific, okay?

If E is UV, then I want one of the endpoints, let's say U to be an S, and I want the other to not be an S. So it's in capital V minus S. And that would be a crossing edge. And among all the crossing edges, I want to take one of minimum weight. There might be many, but pick any one. Then I claim that edge is in a minimum spanning tree.

This is our golden ticket, right? If we can guarantee an edge is in the minimum spanning tree, then we plug that into our dynamic program. Instead of guessing, we'll just take that edge. We know it's in the minimum spanning tree. Then we'll contract it and repeat this process. So the tricky part, I mean, it is true that the minimum weight edge is in a minimum spanning tree.

I'll give that away, okay? But the question is, what do you do then, right? And I guess you contract and repeat, but that would be Kruskal's algorithm. But this is in some sense a more general tool that will let us identify edges that are guaranteed to be in a minimum spanning tree, even after we've identified some edges as being in the minimum spanning tree. So it's a little more powerful. We've had a couple of claims so far.

We didn't prove them. You'll just have to trust me. I know proofs kind of get a little scary. Now we actually get to do algorithms using these lemmas. So we'll start with maybe the less obvious algorithm, but it's nice because it's very much like Dijkstra's. It follows very closely to the Dijkstra's model.

And then we'll get to one that we've all been thinking about, which is choose a minimum edge we contract and then repeat. That doesn't, that does work, but the obvious way is maybe slow. We want to do it in linear time, okay? So let's start with the Dijkstra-like algorithm. This is Prim's algorithm. In general, the idea, we want to apply this greedy choice property.

And to apply the greedy choice property, you need to choose a cut. With Prim, we're going to start out with an obvious cut, which is a single vertex. If we have a single vertex S and we say that is our capital S, then you know there's some images coming out of it, right? There's basically S versus everyone else, okay? That's a cut. And so I could take the minimum weight edge coming out of that cut and put it in my minimum spanning tree.

So when I do that, I put my minimum spanning tree. I put it in my minimum spanning tree because I know it's in some minimum spanning tree. Now I'm going to make capital S grow a little bit to include that vertex and repeat. That's actually also a very natural algorithm. Start with a tiny S and just keep growing it one by one at each stage. Use our lemma to guarantee that edge I'm adding is still in the minimum spanning tree.

So to make that work, line one here, we're always going to need to choose the minimum weight edge that's coming out of the cut. And we'll do that using a priority queue just like we do in Dijkstra. So for every edge, I'm sorry, for every vertex that's in V minus S, we're going to have that vertex in the priority queue. And the question is, what is the key value of that node stored in the priority queue? So the invariant I'm going to have is that the key of V is the minimum of weights of edges that cross the cut into V. So for vertex V, I want to look at the, I'm not going to compute this every time.

I'm going to maintain it only, right? I want the minimum weight of an edge that starts in S and goes to V, which is not an S because V in queue, queue only stores the vertices that are not in S. I want to make the key value to be that minimum weight. So if I chose the overall minimum vertex, that gives me the edge of minimum weight that crosses the cut. And this will be easier to maintain, but let's first initialize everything. Okay.

So we're going to actually initialize this with S being the empty set. So queue will store everybody, except I'm going to get things started by setting, for particular vertex, little S, this is line three. I'm going to set its key to zero. It doesn't matter who little S is, that's just your start vertex. Just pick one vertex and set its key to zero. And then of course, it to be chosen first because for everybody else, for V not equal to S, I'm going to set the key to infinity because we haven't seen any edges that go in there, but we'll change that in a moment.

Okay. So that was the initialization. Now we're going to do a loop starting line six. We're going to keep going until the queue is empty because when the queue is empty, that means s is everybody. And at that point we'll have a spanning tree on the whole graph and it better be a minimum. Okay.

And we're going to do that by extracting the minimum from our priority queue. When we remove queue, we remove vertex U from the queue. This means we're adding U to S. Okay, so by taking it out of the queue, that means it enters S by the invariant at the top. Okay, so we need to update this invariant, take all the key values. We need to update this invariant that all the key values are correct.

As soon as we move a vertex into S, now there are new edges. We have to consider from S to not S. And we do that just by looking at all the neighbors of U. Okay, I haven't. Yeah, okay. This is usually how it's written in dyktros, except in dyktros, these are the outgoing edges from U and V are the neighbors.

Okay, so here it's an undirected graph. So these are the neighbors of U. This is an adjacency list in line eight. So the first thing I'm going to say is if V and Q, so we're just gonna store a Boolean for every vertex about whether it's in the queue. And so when I extract it from the queue, I just set that Boolean to false. Being in the queue is the same as being not in S.

And this is what queue represents. So if we're in the queue, same as saying V not in S, then we're going to do a check, which lets us compute the minimum. This is gonna look a lot like relaxation, right? A couple of things going on because I wanna compute not just the value of the minimum spanning tree, I actually want to find the minimum spanning tree. So I'm gonna store parent pointers, but this is just basically taking a min. I say if the weight of this edge is smaller than what's currently in the key, then update the key because the key is supposed to be the min.

Okay, that's all we need to do to maintain this invariant, this for loop. After the for loop, this property will be restored. V dot key will be that minimum. And furthermore, we kept track of where the minimum came from. So when you end up extracting a vertex, you've already figured out which edge you added to put that into the set. So in fact, you already had a parent, and this would be U dot parent.

We wanna add that edge into the minimum spanning tree when we add U to S, okay? So at the end of the algorithm for every vertex B, we want V dot parent, and that will be our minimum spanning tree. Those are the edges that will form the minimum spanning tree. Okay, let's do an example. Here's the graph and the weights are shown. So I want to start at the S vertex just because I know it does an interesting thing or it's a nice example.

Here's my weighted undirected graph. I wanna compute minimum spanning tree. I'm gonna start with a capital S being, actually I start with capital S being nothing, and all of the weights, all of those key values are actually infinity. So we write the key values in, did I say, did I do blue? So initially everything is infinity except for, yeah, except for the vertex, except for S, and the value is zero, okay? So all of these things are in my priority queue.

And so when I extract from the queue, I of course get S, okay? So that's the point of that setup. So when I draw a red circle containing, the red circle here is supposed to signify capital S, okay? So at this point, I've added capital S, little S to capital S, and then I look at all of my neighbors, V of S, right? And I make sure that they are outside of S. And in this case, they are all three neighbors are not in S.

And then I look at the weights of the edges. Here I have a weight seven, that's smaller than infinity. So across that infinity, right seven, 15 smaller than infinity. So I'm gonna cross out infinity and right 15, and 10, surprise, smaller than infinity. So I'm gonna cross out infinity and right 10, okay? So now I've updated the key values for those three nodes.

I should mention in the priority queue to do that, that's a decreased key operation. You need to update the priority queue to say, hey, look, the key of this node changed. And so you're going to have to move it around in the heap or whatever, just like Dijkstra, same thing happens, okay? So I've decreased the key of those three nodes. Now I do another iteration. I looked at all of the key values stored, okay?

The smallest one is seven because the zero nodes no longer in there. So I'm gonna add our seven node to capital S. So capital S is growing to include that node. I've extracted it from the queue. And now I look at all the neighbors of that node. So for example, nine is less than infinity.

So I cross out right nine, 12 is less than infinity. So I write 12, five is less than infinity. So I write five. S is a neighbor, but it's already in biggest. So we're not gonna touch that edge. I'm not gonna touch SK.

I will end up looking at every edge twice, right? So no big deal. Right now, who's smallest? Five, right? I think, yes, it's the smallest blue key. So we're gonna add five to the set.

Sorry, add this vertex to the set S. And then look at all the outgoing edges from here. So six is actually less than 12. So that edge is better than the 12, right? Then eight is less than 10. 14 is definitely less than infinity. And we look at the five edge, but that edge stays inside the red set, right?

So we forget about that. Next smallest value is six. So we add that guy in. We look at edges from that vertex, but actually nothing happens because all those vertices are already inside capital S. So we don't care about those edges. The next one is eight.

So we'll add that vertex in and there's only one edge that leaves the cut. So that's three and three is indeed better than 14. So now small ski is three. Notice the small ski is smaller than anything we've seen before other than zero, but that's okay. So we just added in and there's no edges leaving the cut from there. And then over on the right, we have nine and 15.

So first we'll add nine. There's no edges there. Then we add 15, okay? So that's everything we're done. Q is empty. So where is the minimal spanning tree?

Luckily, all of the edges have different numbers as labels, okay? So when I have a three here in the lower left, what I mean is include three in the minimum spanning tree. Did I bold these? Yes, they're bolded here. These are actually the parent pointers, okay? Six will be in the minimum spanning tree, seven, nine, 15 and eight.

For every, whoops, for every vertex except the starting one, we'll have a parent, which means we'll have exactly n minus one edges and that's a good sign. And in fact, this will be a minimum spanning tree, okay? That's the claim because every time we drew a circle to include a bigger thing, we were guaranteed that the edge was in the minimum spanning tree by applying our property with our pet, okay? And to prove correctness, you need to prove an invariant that our key, the key of every vertex always remains the minimum. So that's an invariant. You could prove that by induction.

We're not gonna prove it here, but we have another invariant, a more interesting one from a minimum spanning tree perspective. You know, it's just sort of an algorithm implementation detail that the tree T sub S within S is always contained in a minimum spanning tree, oh gee. So we have this way of computing minimum spanning tree for all vertices V, but what I'd like to do is just look at V that's currently in S. By the end, that will be the whole thing. But if I look at V in S and I always look at the edge from V to V dot parent, that gives me this tree TS. And I claim it will be contained in a minimum spanning tree of the entire graph K proof by induction.

So by induction, let's assume induction hypothesis will be that let's say there's a minimum spanning tree T star, which contains TS of S. And then what this algorithm does, it is repeatedly, is it repeatedly grows S by adding the vertex U to S. So let's suppose that adds U to S. I'm actually gonna look at the edge that it adds. So we have S and V minus S. And we do this thing like we just saw of growing by one.

We add one new vertex over to S and that vertex has a parent, has a parent pointer. So that edge I'm gonna call E. So we're adding some vertex U that we extract at the minimum. We also added an edge E to TS because we grew S by one. Okay, so when I do all of that, all I do is say, look, greedy choice property guarantees, there's a minimum spanning tree that contains E because we extracted the min from the Q and the key values are, as I was arguing before, that's the minimum overall edge that crosses the cut. E is the minimum way edge that crosses the cut.

And so by greedy choice property, there is some minimum spanning tree that contains E. But actually I need that minimum, I need that the minimum spanning tree not only contains E, but also contains all the other spanning tree edges that we had already said were in T star. Okay, so here's where I'm using the stronger property now. I can modify T star to include E and T sub S. So we already assumed that T star includes S, I'm sorry, T sub S. I just don't want to break that.

So here's what I'm saying is there's some edge, yeah, maybe there's some edge over in T star that we had to remove, right? And then we put E in and then we get a minimum spanning tree again, T star prime. Okay, the edge that I cannot, the edge that I remove cannot be one of the TS edges because the TS edges are all inside S. So because I'm only removing an edge that crosses the cut, I'm not disturbing TS. TS will remain inside T star, but then I get the new property that S, I'm sorry, that E is inside T star. And so I prove this in variant holds, okay?

I keep changing T star, but I always preserve the property that all of the spanning tree edges that are inside S are contained in some minimum spanning tree of G. Okay, so that's how we use the greedy choice property to get correctness of Prim's algorithm. So what's the running time then? I guess it depends on what priority queue you use, but whatever priority queue you use, it's the same as dextras. So in particular, if we use Fibonacci heats, again, which we're not covering, we get V log V plus E, okay? Okay, let's do one more algorithm, Kruskal's algorithm.

Kruskal's algorithm is a little bit weirder from the S perspective, I guess. We'll see what cuts we're using in a moment, but it's based around this idea of, well, the globally minimum weight edge is the minimum weight edge for all cuts that cross it, or for all cuts that it crosses. The globally minimum weight edge is going to be a valid choice. And so by this theorem, you could pick some S that partitions the endpoints of E. Therefore, E is in a minimum spanning tree. So let's choose that one first, right?

And then repeat. Conceptually, what we want to do is that dynamic programming idea of contract the edge and then find the minimum weight edge that remains. But the way I'm gonna phrase it doesn't explicitly contract, although implicitly it's doing that. And there's a catch. The catch is, suppose I've picked some edges out to be in my minimum spanning tree. The tricky part is I don't wanna add any cycles.

Case cycles are bound. I have to keep track of whether I should actually add an edge. In other words, whether vertices have already been connected to each other. And it turns out you've already seen a data structure to do this. This is what we call a union find, right? So I want to maintain for my minimum spanning tree so far, so I'm adding edges one at a time.

And I have some tree, well, it's actually a forest right now, but I'm gonna call it T and I'm gonna maintain it at a union find structure, a disjoint set data structure, okay? Remember this has three operations, makeset union and find set. So tell me given an item which set does it belong to, we're gonna use that. The sets are going to be the connected components. So to get started, I'm not gonna have any edges in my tree. And so every vertex is in its own connected component.

So I represent that by calling makeset v for all vertices. So every vertex lives in its own singleton set line four, okay? And now I like to do the minimum edge weight and then the next minimum edge weight and the next minimum edge weight. That's also known as sorting. So I'm gonna sort e by weight, increasing weight. So I get to start with the minimum weight edge.

So now I'm gonna do a for loop over the edges line six, increasing order by weight. Now I wanna know, I have an edge, it's basically the minimum weight edge among the edges that remain. And so I wanna know whether I should add it. I'm gonna add it provided the end points of the edges are not in the same connected component. How can I find out whether two vertices are in the same connected component given this setup? So if you find set of you, what?

Yeah, if you do find set of you, yeah, if you find set of you is from find set of v, find set just returns some identifier, okay? We don't really care what it is as long as it returns the same thing for the same set, right? So if you and v are the same set in other words, they're in the same connected component, then find set will return the same thing for both. Yeah, okay. But provided they're not equal, then we can add this edge into our tree. So we add e to the set t, and then we have to represent the fact that we just merged the connected components of you and v.

So we do that with a union call last line. And if you're ever wondering, what the heck do we use union find for? This is the answer. The union find data structure was invented in order to implement Kruzschol's algorithm faster, okay? In fact, a lot of data structures come from graph algorithms. The reason Fibonacci heats were invented is because there were Digstras algorithms and we wanted it to run faster, right?

So same deal here, we just saw it in the reverse order. Here's the runtime. So other than the sorting time, this algorithm is pretty good. It's faster, but if you're sorting an N log N algorithm, this is not so great, okay? That's how it goes. But when this algorithm is really good is if your weights are integers.

So if you have reasonably small weights, Kruzschol's algorithm is better, okay? Otherwise, I guess you prefer Prim's algorithm, but either way, let me briefly tell you about correctness. Okay, again, we prove correctness with an invariant. Claim that all the, claim that at all times the tree of, the tree T of edges that we've picked so far is contained in some minimum spanning tree, T star. T star is gonna change, but I always want the edges I've chosen to be inside a minimum spanning tree, right? Again, we can prove this by induction.

So assume by induction that this is true so far and then assume, suppose that we're adding an edge. So we're converting T into T prime, which is T union E. By the data structural step, I know that the endpoints of E, U and V are at different connected components. Because the union find data structure maintains connected components, that's another invariant to prove. We're considering adding this edge, which finds, well, which connects two different connected components. So I wanna use the greedy choice property with some S.

So what should SB? I want E to cross a cut, right? So what's a good cut? Let's say S equals the connected component of U or connected component of V, E crosses that, all right? Because it goes from U to V and U is on one side, V is on the other side. I wanted to include an entire connected component because when I applied the greedy choice property, I modified T star and I don't wanna modify.

I don't wanna delete any of the edges that are already in my connected components that I've already put there, right? So when I apply this greedy choice property, I'm not deleting anything from T. Everything that was in T is still in T star. So that tells me that T prime is contained in T star prime. The new T star that I get when I apply the cut and paste argument, right? I modified T star potentially by removing one edge and putting E in.

And the edge that I remove was not already in T which means I also get that my new edge E is in the minimum spanning tree. And so that's how you prove by induction that at all times the edges you've chosen so far are in T star. Actually, to apply the greedy choice property, I need not only that E crosses the cut, I also need that E is the minimum weight edge crossing the cut. There's a little more argument to prove. The rough idea is that if you forget about the edges we've already dealt with, E is the globally minimum weight edge, okay? But what about the edges we've already dealt with?

Some of them are in the tree. The edges that are in T, those obviously don't cross the cut. That's how we designed the cut. The cut was designed not to cross, not to separate any of these connected components. So with all the edges that we've added to T, those are okay. They're not related to edges that cross the cut.

But we may have already considered some lower weight edges that we didn't add to T. If we didn't add an edge to T, that means actually they were in the same set, which means all those are extra edges in here that are inside a connected component. They have a smaller weight than E, but they're inside the connected component. So again, they're not crossed. They don't cross the cut rather. So E is basically the first edge that we're considering that crosses this cut, but otherwise we could have added that other edge first, okay?

So we have to do some sort of greedy argument again, considering edges by weight, and E is gonna be the first edge that crosses that particular cut. So E has to be the minimum edge weight crossing the cut, so the greedy property applies. So we can put E in the minimum spanning tree, and this algorithm is correct, okay? So we've used that lemma a zillion times by now, but that is minimum spanning tree in nearly linear time.