Okay, let's get started. Welcome back. Today, we're going to do some of the coolest data structures we will see in this class, potentially some of the coolest data structures ever. You have started a screen share. Okay. I don't know why he's talking to me.

Okay, perfect. Okay, so coolest data structure ever binary trees. You've certainly seen trees in many forms in the past, including in this class, we've talked and used trees as a lower bound tool in our decision tree model. But in this lecture and in the next lecture, we're going to build one data structure that is almost superior to all data structures we have seen and can do almost anything really fast. First, let's recall all the data structures we've seen so far. We've got arrays, linked lists, dynamic arrays, sorted arrays, hash tables here.

And the two sets of operations were interested in supporting the two interfaces. One was sequences where we're maintaining items in a specified order. We want to be able to insert an item right after another item or delete an item in the middle of the list and always be able to access the item. We haven't seen any good data structures for that problem. We're really good at inserting and deleting at the beginning or the end of the sequence, but we haven't seen anything that's efficient at inserting in the middle of the list or deleting in the middle of the list. Linked lists, you can't even get to the middle of the list in less than linear time.

Array, you can get to the middle. But if you make any changes, you have to do the shift, which is very expensive. So next lecture for the first time, we will see all of those operations efficient. I mentioned our goal where efficient means logarithmic in this class. So we're not quite as good as linked lists and dynamic arrays at inserting and deleting at the end. So we're going to get all the best of all the worlds where we can solve all the things, all the operations that don't build or iterate through the entire structure.

And that of course takes linear time. But we can do all the others in logarithmic time. Our sets, sets were maintaining a bunch of items which have intrinsic keys and we want to search by key. So hash tables are great if you're only doing exact searches. If you want to find a key and get yes or no, is it in there? If it's in there, give me the item.

That's what Python dictionaries do. And they're great at inserting and deleting. But they're really bad at find previous and find next. This is the unsuccessful case. So if I search for a key and it's not in my structure, I would like to know more than just the answer. No, I would like to know what the previous and next items are that actually are in the structure.

So what are my nearest matches when I search by key? That's a natural query. And the only data structure we have that's good at it is a sorted array because binary search gives this to us. If we search for a key by binary search and don't find it, the position that we end up at is right between the previous and the next one. But of course, sorted arrays are terrible for dynamic ops. We don't know how to maintain, we can't maintain a sorted array without any gaps when we're doing insertions and deletions in some sense today and the next class.

Binary trees let us represent a sorted order or a general order of items dynamically and still allow us to do very fast things like get at of I and find previous of key and things like that. So that's our goal. We're not going to quite get to all of that today. We're going to get an incomparable thing called the height of the tree. And then next time we'll be able to finish and achieve this goal. Today is just to service that goal.

So what is a binary tree? Let's look at an example and then we'll define it more precisely. Mathematicians will call this a rooted binary tree here. So anyway, that's what we're looking at here. This is an example of a binary tree. It has a bunch of nodes which we're drawing in circles, ovals here.

It has items in the nodes which we're writing as letters. We have item A, item B, item C, and there's links between them. This is like linked lists, but in general a node X is going to have a parent pointer. If you look in the lower right hand of the slide here. In general a node X is going to have a parent pointer, a left child, left pointer, and a right child and right pointer. It also has an item inside of it.

So I'm going to talk about node.left is a pointer to the left, the node down on the left, node.right, parent node item gives, if you look at the node A, its item is A. So let's talk more about this here. So the parent of A is nothing. We call A the root. There's going to be a unique node that has no parent. Then we have node B whose parent is A.

Node C whose parent is parent is A. Node D its parent is B. Node E did I just do D? Node. Okay. Well, anyway, I forget which one I just did.

Its parent is B. Node F its parent is D. So in other words, anyway, you can fill the rest of this in. I guess I mostly did it for you. But in other words, each of those lines shown there is a bidirectional pointer. In this direction it's the parent direction.

And we can go bidirectionally in those. Because it's bidirectional, we don't draw the arrows. We just draw undirected lines. That is in general what a binary tree looks like. A key invariant is that if you take a node and say go to its left pointer, left child, and then go to that node's parent, this should be the same as the node. So that's just saying parent is always the inverse of a left or right operation.

Okay. So that's a binary tree. Now, the intuition of what's going on here, you could say we're inspired by a linked list. Linked list has a very similar structure. There's a node, it had an item in it, and it has a next pointer and a previous pointer. So in some sense, if it's a, if it's doubly linked, we had a previous pointer.

If it was singly linked, we only had a next pointer. And if you think about the limits of linked lists, especially singly linked lists, if you just have one pointer per node, you can only build the list. And so the result is this node is going to have linear depth. Depths means how many pointers do I have to follow to get here from the root of the structure? Which for linked lists was the head. Let's go back here.

So for linked lists, it's the head. If it's doubly linked, okay, I can have a head and a tail, and I can put bi directions on here, but then still in the middle, the middle item has depth linear. So there's no way to get there unless in linear time. With binary trees, because we use two types of next pointers, left and right, we can build a tree. And we know trees in general have logarithmic, can have logarithmic height. And so it's possible in a tree to get any nodes starting from the root and only traverse and only log and traversals.

So that's the intuition of what's going on. Today, we're going to talk about height of the tree. So let's define a couple definitions. Let's talk about some definitions here. Subtree, height, height of node. Okay.

So a tree decomposes into subtrees. So for example, the sub tree rooted out of node is that node and all the descendants of that node. Because we have parents and children, we can generalize this in the familial tree sense. We can talk about ancestors of a node. So the ancestors of F, if we go here, the ancestors of F-arts parents, its grandparent, great-grandparents, and so on. Together, all of those are called ancestors.

It doesn't quite correspond to familial trees because familial trees have like two parents. And here you only have a unique parent and such. But note that the root, of course, has no parents. We also talk about leaves of the trees. Nodes with no children are called leaves. Descendants also useful.

The descendants of B are all of its children and all of its grandchildren all the way down, but just within that sub tree. So the sub tree of X consists of X and its descendants. And we think of X being the root of that sub tree. So we're kind of forgetting about everything outside of the sub tree when we talk about the sub tree of X. Let's talk about the depth of node. Depth of node is, I guess, the number of its ancestors.

I usually think of it as the number of edges in the path from X up to the root. So every node has a unique path that goes upwards until it can't go anymore. The depth of E, here, if we look back, the depth of E would be two because there's two edges. One, two, here, you can see how I'm pointing. Anyway, it's two. So maybe let's add some depths here.

Okay, I've added some depths. Height, so if we talk about height now, so depth is measuring downwards because if you imagine depth within water, we've got surface, then we measure how deep we are from the surface. Height in the reverse direction, of course, you measure from the leaf level up because leaves are at the bottom of the tree. So the height of a node is going to be the number of edges and the longest path downward, which is the same thing as the maximum depth of a node in X's subtree. So let's show, let's do height in red. So how long is the longest path from F to a leaf?

Well F is a leaf, so all leaves have height zero. D, so there are two ways to go down this. That doesn't go to a leaf. This one here goes to a leaf and its height is zero. So that would be height one. There's, B has two leaves that can get to, we take the longest one, so that's length two.

A similarly has height three. So height, we measure upward, depth, we measure downward. One thing we care about is just the height of the tree overall, which is the height of the root. Do you want me to say that here? Yes. And we're going to call that H.

We're going to use that a lot. And what we're going to achieve today is all of these running times, instead of being log n, they're going to be order H. Today our goal is to get all the operations we care about in order H time. And then next lecture, we're going to guarantee that as always log n and then we'll get log n time. So we'll guarantee that and then we'll always have log n time. So we need to do a bunch of work to achieve log n.

And today we'll do the work that's all the tree manipulation. And as long as your tree is nice and shallow, it doesn't have high height because logarithmic height, everything will be log n. Of course, there are trees that are bad. We can have a tree where we only use right pointers and all the left pointers are none. So there are trees that have very high height. We want to avoid those, but we won't worry about that until next time.

Now, let's... Okay. How do we use these trees to represent either a sequence or a set then? I claim that there is a natural order in trees called the traversal order of nodes or items in the tree. Let's define this. So I'm going to define a particular order.

Say in this example, the traversal order is going to be F, D, B, E, A, C. So what's this order? Well, what I'd like to do is recursively define an order where the root of the tree is somewhere in the middle and everything in the left subtree is earlier in the order than the root and everything in the right subtree is later. So you can see here, C comes after A and then all the other nodes come before A. And recursively, if I look at node B, which appears over here on the left, E is to the right of it, but everything else is all to the left of A. So E is between B and A with B on the left and then F and D to the left of that.

And again, F comes before D because F is in the left subtree of D. So we say for every node, the nodes in X dot left are before X and the nodes in X dot right come after X. And this uniquely defines an order called a traversal order. That's also called in-order traversal order. It's called in-order because it's in the traversal order. So it's very circular, but you may have seen in-order traversal.

That's the same thing. There's a very simple algorithm for computing this. If I want to iterate all the nodes within a subtree X rooted by X, I just iterate on all of the nodes in the left subtree. Then I output X itself. Then I iterate on all the nodes in the right subtree. So you may have seen that algorithm before.

This is just another way to codify the same thing. The result is all the nodes within a subtree appear continuously with no interruptions. And then the parents are going to come before or after, depending on whether this is a left or a right child. OK, so now it's just a matter of connecting the dots because we're representing an order. And for a sequence, that's going to be the sequence order. If we want to store in items X0 through X1, we're going to build some kind of tree.

So for sequences, OK, so that's for sequences. For sets, that order is just going to be the, it's going to be disordered order. And we're going to be effectively representing the sorted order of keys, say increasing. But before we get to that, we're going to talk about different operations we can do just playing around with traversal order. And then we're going to use these to build the sequence and set operations that we care about. So a first operation I'll call subtree first.

Seems appropriate that it's called first. It's the first one. So given a node, which we call node here, this defines a subtree, which usually we draw subtree as these triangles hanging off of the node. So with subtree first, I would like to say among all the nodes in the subtree, which comes first in this traversal order. So just restricting to that subtree, subtree of node, where is it in this tree? Where should I look for this node?

The left most leaf, right? We just want to go left as much as possible. If you just remember our definition, all the nodes in the left come before X and all the nodes, then all the nodes in the right. So it's got to be on the left subtree if there is one. Of course, we can't do this forever. So say we would fall off the tree until we would fall off the tree, which means node is none.

OK, so we stop before that would happen. So it's like when you're giving directions like, oh, you keep driving until you see the store. It's the block right before that. That's not very helpful, right? So you keep iterating node equals node dot left until node becomes none. And then you undo one step.

You all know how to program that. It's not hard. So that last non, non node, which might actually be the root, it might be node. Maybe it has no left children. But in that case, I claim node is the very first in its subtree traversal order. Because if there are no nodes in the left that come before X, then X is actually first.

Right? OK, so that's it. Return none. So if I'm modifying node in place here and the very last one before I hit none, that's the minimum. That's the first item in the traversal order. Similarly, you can define subtree last.

Do we go here? OK. Similarly, you can define a subtree last. So now let's talk about successor node. So in this case, I want to know what is the next after none in the overall trees traversal order? Here, I was restricting to a single subtree.

Now I'm thinking about the entire tree and the entire traversal order. And given a node, I want to know which one comes next. Call this, let's call this the successor then, right? So every node has a unique successor. Let's do some examples. Let's call, let's see.

So there's going to be two cases, right? If we look at successor of A, it's got a right child, if you think back to our graph example. And in this case, the right child of A is the successor, but that's not always the case. I don't have an example of this explicitly, but if I had another node, which we could call G, the successor of A would actually then be G because all of those items come after A in that order. But which one comes first? The leftmost leaf.

That's the problem we just solved, right? So if A has a right child, what we want is the leftmost leaf, the first thing in that subtree. The right subtree, right child subtree. So this is the case one, if node.write, then if node.write, so we have a child, then what we want is subtree first of the right child. Okay, right? Okay, so we can reduce this to another operation.

But what if the node doesn't have a right child? For example, it could be a leaf, right? Say we're talking, taking the successor, I mean, it doesn't have to be a leaf. It could be F, which has no children. It could be D, which has one child, but no right child. So what's the successor of F?

Well, it's D, which in this case is the parent, but it's not always. For example, if we do a successor of E, its parent is actually earlier in the order because E was a right child. Here, F was a left child, and so its parent was after. Kind of weird, right? The successor of D happens to be B because it was the left child of its parent. Okay, so this seems like the easy case.

If we're the left child of our parent, then our successor is our parent basing on that small example. But we can argue generally in a moment, what's the successor of E? Well, it's not B because that comes earlier, right? In fact, all the things in B subtree come earlier or equal to E. So we have to keep going up. And then it turns out the successor of E is A because that subtree was left child of A because B was a left child of A.

So the general strategy is walk up the tree until we go up a traversal whose reverse direction would be left. So walk up the tree and when I say walk up, I mean the node equals node.parent iteration until we go up a left branch. So before we do the change node equals node.parentLeft, right? So we can check that after we do the traversal, that parent is exactly the node we're looking for. And why is that true in general? Let's look at a more generic picture here.

Let's look at here. So if we're starting at some node, let's say its parent is to the right. So it comes later in order for a while. We're doing successor. OK, so it goes to the left for a while. So these are all the nodes will come earlier in the order because by definition everything in the right subtree comes after.

And at some point we have a pattern, I'm sorry, a parent that's to the right, meaning this node was the left child of its parent, right? And that node by definition then will come after all of the nodes in here. And could there be anything in between node and this parent, grandparent ancestor? Right, only if there was something in the subtree, in this subtree show. And we're in the case here where there is no right subtree for our original node. So this is where all the nodes in between node and there would be, but there aren't any.

Therefore, that is the successor, the physical successor. So that's sort of a general argument as to why this works. We should note here the traversal order is never explicitly computed. It's always implicit here. We can't afford to maintain this as say an array. And the reason is that's expensive.

We don't we can't maintain an array of things to be able to insert in the middle, whereas this is cheap, right? I can't afford to maintain this structure here and do all of those things. And so the reason we're talking about operations is they're letting us manipulate the order or in this case, letting us iterate through the order, I should say. So we have this was an algorithm. We have an algorithm for iterating through the entire order, but that takes a linear time. This was getting started in the order, finding the first thing in the order.

And this was given one node finding the next one. So how long do these operations take? And the answer is at most the height of the entire tree. In fact, it's going to be the depth of that first node. But in the worst case, that's the height of the entire tree. And in general, all these operations are going to be order H.

We need to think about it in each case, right? OK, interesting. In this case, we're just calling subtree first. So that would take order time. OK, nothing. OK.

So you're walking up the tree instead of down. But that's going to cost exactly the height of the node. We happened to stop earlier. But worst case, we're at order H, right? Worst case. For all this, all the operations we consider today, we just want to get an order H bound.

And later, we will bound H. So the point is, these are fast. If H is small, like log n, these are almost instantaneous. Whereas if I had to update the explicit traversal order, say, as an array, I would have to spend linear time every time I make a change. And yes, it would be fast to do success. Or if I had this stored explicitly, but maintaining it would be impossible.

Maintaining efficiently would be impossible. So we just talked about queries where I want to follow. So what's next is actually changing the traversal sequence. So these are insert and delete operations. These will correspond roughly to insert app or delete app. But we're not quite in the sequence world yet.

Instead, we're going to focus on inserting or leading in the middle of a subtree. So I'm going to have two nodes. So the traversal order node, so node already exists in the tree. New is a new node that does not yet exist in the tree. Hence, we're calling it new here. And what I'd like to do is insert new right after node.

There's a symmetric operation, which is insert before. It will be implemented almost identically. So we'll just focus on after here. So I want to insert this new node in the reverse order. And we have to do it by manipulating this tree. However, and however we can change the tree, it defines a new traversal order.

So maybe let's do an example. So let's say the first thing we want to do is insert G before E. Okay, let's show the goals here. Insert. Okay, insert G before E. So conceptually, and then let's also insert H after right.

So conceptually, what we want to do is insert G and the way we're giving the node E and we're giving a sort of empty node. I guess I should say a node that just contains G, but it doesn't have any pointers yet. And we'd like to put it before E. So where should we put it? Left child, right? And that this is an easy case.

If we're trying to insert before and there's no left child, stick it there. If I'm trying to insert it after and there's no right child, stick it there. Easy. So case one, here we're inserting after. So if there's no right child, put new there. We're using informal language here.

Putting this new node there instead of writing, for example, node.right equals new because that's the only operation you would need to do. One thing you would do is set node.right equal to new, but you also have to set news parent to be node.right. So instead of worrying about those two pointer changes because we always do bi-directional pointer changes, we're just going to use pseudocode and then you can see if you looked into this that your actual Python code would do all of this. So then what's the other case? That should be our second example. Insert H after A.

So we already have a node after A in the right child in our right sub-tree. So where do I want to put H relative to A then? Well, it should be to the right of A, but it should be before C. It should be to the left of C. So that would mean we want to put it here, shown. In this case, it was pretty easy because the tree was small, but where do I want to put it in general?

Let's think about that. Well, wherever a sub-tree first tells me to put it, right? So the tree first is going to give me the successor and those are kind of parallel. We're in the case now where our node has a right child and then successor tells us where the successor is. It's the first node, which is the leftmost descendant in the right sub-tree of that node. A lot of pointers to follow in that sentence, but it's clear in the picture.

Okay. We want to add it as a left child to the old successor. So put node as a successor. And if you look at the code for successor where in this case, so we know we'll just call sub-tree first of node dot, right? But remember, sub-tree first went left as much as it possibly could. So what that means is this successor node is guaranteed to not have a left child because it was defined by going right once and then going left as much as you could.

So there's no more left, which means we can make one more left. We just add new there and we're done. Now if you look at the traversal order, it will be node then new. It will be node then new, then the old successor and then the rest of that sub-tree. So it's kind of cool. In all cases, I mean, this was constant time.

Here we spent a constant time after we called successor. Successor costs order h time. So this is order h. So that was insertion. Let's do deletion now. All of these are going to have two cases.

So now h is after a. So should be like that. Okay. Okay. Next case, let's do our deletions. Let's delete f first.

Then we're going to delete a. F is leaf. So if we want to delete it, we just erase it. Right? Easy. Leaves are easy to delete.

There's no work to do. So what that means is we would remove, I'm removing the pointer from D to F. You just erase it. Now a trickier one. Suppose we want to delete the root of the tree. This is kind of the hardest case.

But in general, it'd be somewhere in between leaf and root. So if you want to delete a, if I just erased it, then suddenly there are these pointers to nowhere and I would disconnect the tree into two parts. Right? Don't want to do that. I want to keep the tree connected. So we're going to play this trick, which is if I use the predecessor.

So I'm going to look at the predecessor of a, which is e. The one before a here is e. Are we looking at, I should bring this traverse order over. Maybe you wrote that down if you're taking notes. So those guys are adjacent in order. I'm about to remove a from that order so I can momentarily cheat and just swap their labels here.

I'm going to erase a and an e and put e after a. Why? Because it moves a down the tree. And if I get to a leaf, then I'm done. Right? So I'm going to do that in our first case.

So I'm not quite done because it's not a leaf. So again, I look at a's predecessor. It's now G predecessor. We hope is always farther down the tree. Then I swap a with G. So I've preferred, I've preserved the traversal order except where a falls just by moving a earlier in the order.

And now a is a leaf and we can just erase it. So that's what we're going to follow now in, in actuality, it's a little tricky. Sometimes we need to use predecessors. Sometimes we need to use successor. So the cases, if the node is a leaf, just detach it from the parent easy. That's sort of our base case in the recursion.

Otherwise, otherwise there are two cases if there are two. So if we're not a leaf, that means we have a left child or a right child or we could have both, right? Both is going to be the easy case. But in general, I have either there's, there's the left child or there's a right child in either case. I'm going to be, I'm going to be happy. So, so I don't need a both case.

So what do we do if I have a left child that guarantees me that that nodes predecessor is inside the left subtree, which means it's, it's in the lower left of the tree. If I didn't have a left child, the predecessor would actually be higher in the tree and I don't want to go higher. So if I have a left child, I know the predecessor is lower. So I'm going to, to swap my item, the contents of my node with my predecessors item, then I'm going to recursively delete predecessor. And that's, that's the case we looked at in, in this code in the examples, because we always had a left child. If we had a right child, but no left child, we would just do the reverse swap with our successors item and then delete the successor.

In either case, we're going down, right? And then we're, we're, we're walking. So if we start at some node, like, like the root, every time we do this operation, we're walking down and then we're walking down. And in general, we'll keep walking down, resuming where we left off, which means the total amount of time we spend is proportional to the height of the tree worst case. So we're changing identities of the nodes when we do this, because we didn't actually move our circle. So we're going to move the circle stayed in place, right?

Our node circle stayed in place. And what we changed was the item that was stored in that circle. So whether we call that node E or, or a, it doesn't really matter. It's just the root node. So we're going to play a lot of these tricks, moving items around. So far, we, we hadn't been doing that.

We've just been creating nodes, placing them somewhere. But now in this, in this delete operation is the first time where we're changing what's stored in the nodes, but we can still define the traversal order. Of, of that tree is, is B, no, D, B, G, EHC, which should be what, what we get there if we delete F and A, of course. Trees will not preserve connections. That's just the name of the game. We, we have to allow this.

Otherwise we can't do anything. That's kind of the short version of that. So in the last few minutes of, of this topic, let's talk about how we take these trees and implement a set or a sequence. I've already alluded to this. So for a sequence, we just make the traversal order equal to the order that we're trying to represent the sequence order. And if we are trying to sort a set item, items with keys, we're going to make the traversal order equal to ordered by increasing key, increasing item.key, I should say.

And in some sense, that's it. But then we need to think about how do we implement all these operations? So, so maybe most enlightening is for starters is, is finding a key in the tree. So this is going to correspond to binary search. If I'm searching for a key, maybe I replace these all with numbers. Let's do that.

So I can think about key values. So we've got one, seven, 12, 17, 19 and 23. This is now in key order. If you think of the traversal order, the property is that all keys in the left sub tree of the root are less than the root. And the root is less than all the keys in the right sub tree and recursively all the way down. That is something called binary search tree property BST property.

These here, we're calling the binary binary tree sets or set binary trees, but there are also none in the literature as binary search trees. A term you may some in the literature called binary search trees, a term you probably have heard before. So this is a special case of what of what we're doing. We're restoring the keys in order. And then if I want to search for a key like 13, I compare that key with the root. I see, oh, it's not equal and it's to the left because it's less than 17.

So 13 is left over here. 13 is right of seven. 13 is right of 12. And so I know that this is where 13, for example, would belong. But there's no right children there. And so I know and find that I just return nothing. If I was doing find previous, then I would return that node because I have tried to go to the right. The last time before I fell off the tree, I was going to the right.

And therefore that last node I had was the previous item. If I was trying to find next, what would I do? I would just take that node computed. I would take that node computed successor, which we already know how to do, of course. And that would happen to be the root. So now I can do these exact searches.

When do I find previous and find next when I fall off the tree? I find either the previous or the next. And then with the predecessor or successor, I can find the other one. So that's how we can do find and find previous and find next. To do sequences, we need to do a little bit more work. So that is what we're going to do next time.

You have stopped screen scare.