Okay, welcome back. Okay, you guys ready? Hopefully to learn an awesome data structure today. Let's get to it. So this is a data structure named after a guy, Peter Van Emde Boas, and he in the 70s, he invented this really cool data structure. It's super fast, very, very amazing.

It's actually pretty simple to implement and used a lot in practice in network routers, among other things. So my first tell you what it does, it's an old data structure, but I feel like it's taken us really kind of decades to, to understand. The problem it's solving is what you might call a predecessor problem. It's very similar to the sort of problem that binary search trees solve, but we're going to do it faster. But in a somewhat different model, in that the elements we are going to be storing are not just things that we know how to compare. That would be a, the comparison model, we're storing integers and the integers come from a universe u of little size u, and we'll assume that they're non-negatives.

So from zero to u minus one, although you could support negative integers, which out without much more effort than what we're going to do today. Just a side note there. And the operations we want to support, we're storing a set of n of those elements. We want to do insert, delete, and successor. So these are the operations that you should be familiar with. You should know how to solve these in log n time per operation with a balanced binary search tree like AVL trees.

You want to add something to the set, delete something from the set, or given a value I want to know the next largest value this is in the set. We'll focus on these three operations, although you'll see if you go, if you do like a quick Google search or something, or you look in the reference textbooks in this course, there's lots of operations that you could do with pan and deboas. So far, so good. We know how to do this in log n time. We're going to do it in log log u time. So an extra log, but we're cheating a little bit in that we're replacing n with u.

Now, in a lot of applications, u is pretty reasonable, like 2 or 30, 2 to the 32 or 2 to the 64, depending on what kind of integers you usually work with. So log log of that is usually really tiny and often smaller than log of n. So in particular, on the theory side, for example, if u is a polynomial in n, or even larger than that, you can support n to the polylog n, then log log u is the same as log log n up to constant factors. And so this is an exponential improvement over regular balanced binary search trees. Okay, so super fast. This is also pretty clean and simple, though it'll take us a while to get there.

One application for this, as I mentioned, is in network routers. And I believe most network routers use this VEB data structure these days, though I think it's changed probably in the last decade or so. Network routers, you have to store a routing table, which looks like for IP range, you know, from this to this, please send your packets along this port. Anyway, send them along some port. So if you mark the beginnings of those ranges as items in your set, and given an actual IP address, you want to know what range it's in. That's a predecessor or a successor problem.

And so VEB lets you solve that really fast. Okay, so we want to shoot for log log u. We're going to get there by a series of improvements on a very simple idea. So the first question is, how might we get log log u bound? Where might that come from? This is just intuition.

We see logs all the time. You organize the height of the tree into a tree, right? So we normally think of a tree. Let's say we have u down here, the bottom of our triangle. So the height is log u. So somehow we want a binary search on the levels of this tree, right?

If we could kind of start in the middle and then decide whether we need to go up or down, that's exactly what VEB will do. So you can binary search on levels of a tree. So at least some intuition. Now let's think about this in terms of recurrences. There's a recurrence for binary search, which is usually you have k things. T of k is T of k over two plus order one.

You spend constant time to decide whether you should go left or right in a binary search, or in this case, up or down somehow. And then you reduce the problem to half of the size. So this solves to log k. In our case, k is actually log u. So we want a recurrence that looks something like T of log u equals T of log u over two plus order one. Okay, so even if you don't believe in the binary search perspective, this is clearly a recurrence that solves to log log u.

I'm just substituting k equals log u here. So that could be on the right track. Now that's in terms of log u. What if I wanted to rewrite this occurrence in terms of u? What would I get? If I change the logarithm by a number, I'm sorry, the, if I change the logarithm of a number by a factor of two, how does u change?

Think about that for a sec. I guess it's also shown, but square root u, right? So I've changed what the variable is here. But this is really the same recurrence. It will still solve to log log u. The number of times you have to apply square root to a number to get one is log log u.

So this is some more intuition for how VEB is going to achieve log log u. And in fact, this is the primary intuition that that we'll be using. So what we would like is to you know, take our problem, which has size u, split it into problems of size square root of u so that we only have to recurse on one of them. And then we'll get this recurrence. Okay, so that's where we're going to go. But where we're going to start is at a very simple data structure for representing a set of n numbers from the universe zero up to u minus one.

And let's say initially, our goal is for insert and delete to be constant time. But let's not worry about successor, successor could take linear time. What would be a good data structure for storing items in this universe? I want you to be involved somehow. I don't just want to like store them in a linked list or items or or assorted array of items. I would like you to be involved insert and delete constant time.

Okay, so I want this is normally called a bit vector, where I want a ray of size u and for each cell in the array, I'm going to write zero or one zero means absent one means present. It's in the set. So let's look at this picture. This is an example of a set with four elements in the set. The universe size is 16 n equals four in this particular example. So if I want to insert into this set, I just change zero to a one.

If I want to delete the set, I change a one to a zero. So those are constant time. Okay, good. If I want to do a successor query, not so good. I might need to spend order u time. Maybe I asked for the successor of this item.

And the only thing to do is to just keep jumping until I get to a one. And the worst case, there's almost to you zeros in a row, right, or you minus n. So that's really slow. But this in fact will be our starting point. It may seem really silly, but it's actually a good starting point for VB. So the second idea is we're going to take our universe and split it into clusters.

He VB if you ever read any literature, he likes to call these galaxies. I think that's a nice name for pieces of the universe, I guess. So now it's a question of how big the cluster should be. But I gave you this picture and I want to think about these galaxies as separate chunks. And I asked for the successor of this, right? How could I possibly speed up the successor search?

So I could store, I could clean this up a little bit. I could, well, okay, this is interesting. So imagine, I'm just trying to collect my words here. So imagine a kind of binary search-ish thing where we're storing auras, right, of our bits. And so each node here, I'm just writing the aura of its two children. And in fact, you could do this all the way up, you could build an entire binary tree.

But remember, what we're trying to do is a binary search on the levels of the tree. And so in particular, I'm going to focus on this level here. This is the middle level of that tree if I drew out the whole thing. And this, and the level is interesting because it's just summarizing, is there anybody in here? Is there anybody in the cluster? Is there, yeah, is there anybody in this cluster?

So we call this the summary vector. So we'll come back to the tree perspective at some point. That's, this is a good picture though of what's going on. But at this level, I'm just going to say, well, let's store the bit vector. Let's also store this summary vector. And now when I want to find the successor of something, I'll first look inside the cluster.

If I don't find my answer, I'll go up to the summary vector and find where is the next cluster that has something in it, right? And then I'll go into that cluster and look for the first one. Okay. So that's, that's a good next step. So number two here will be split the universe into clusters. Okay.

And how about should the clusters be to balance out? There's three searches I'm doing. One is within a cluster, one is within a summary vector, and one is within another cluster. So square root U, that will balance out. If there's square root of U size, then the number of clusters will be square root of U. So the search in the summary vector will be the same as the cost.

And we know that we kind of want to do square root of U recursion somehow. So this is not yet the recursive version, but square root of U is, is exactly right here. So insert with this strategy, it's still constant time. It's two steps ahead of one, but it's good. Successor does three things. First, we look, let's say, successor of X.

First, what we do is look in X's cluster, then if we don't find what we're looking for, then we'll look for the next one bit in the summary vector, and then we'll look for the first one bit in that cluster. So there's two cases. In the lucky case, we find the successor in the cluster that we started in. So that only takes root U time. If we're unlucky, we search in the summary. That takes root U time, and then we find the first one bit that takes root U time.

A whole thing is square root of U, which is of course not very good compared to log N, but it's a lot better than U, which is our first method, the bit vector. So we've improved from U to square root of U. Now, of course, the idea is to recurse. Instead of just doing a bit vector at each of these levels, we're going to recursively represent each of the clusters in this way. This is where things get a little magical in the magic of divide and conquer. And then we'll get T of square root of U instead of square root of U.

And then we'll get a log log cost. Okay, so before I get there, let me give you a little bit of terminology and an example for dealing with clusters. Okay, so in general, remember the things we're searching for are just integers. And what we're talking about is essentially dividing an integer like X by square root of U. And so I is whatever the quotient and J is the remainder. So I want J to be between zero and strictly less than square root of U.

And then this is unique, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic or, yeah, I think that's what it's called. And I is, whoops, there we go. I is the cluster number. And then J is the position of X within that cluster. So let's do an example like I equals nine, which we can see in the blue colored cluster, right, cluster number two. So I claim nine equals two times square root of U, right, here is we see four, I conveniently chose you to be a perfect square.

And this is item zero one within the cluster. And indeed, nine equals two times four plus one. So in general, if you're given X, and I said, I'll look in X's cluster, what that means is look at X integer divided by square root of U, that's the cluster number. And I'll try to search in there. And I look in the summary vectors starting from that cluster name, the name of the cluster for for this guy, right, finding the next cluster, then I'll multiply by square root of U to get my zeros and one A and then continue on. In general, because dividing to multiplying, I don't want to have to think about it too hard.

I'm going to say define some functions to make this a little easier, more intuitive. So when I do integer division by square root of U, which is like taking the floor, I'll call that high of X, the high part of X. And low of X is going to be the remainder, that's the J up here. And if I have the high and the low part, the I and the J, I'm going to use index to go back to X. So index of IJ is going to be I times square root of U plus J. Now, why do I call these high and low, high of X corresponds to the high half of the bits, and low of X corresponds to the bottom half of the bits.

And if you think about it, remember when we take the square root of U in logarithm, it takes log U and divides it in half. So it's exactly in the bit factor, which is log U bits long, we're dividing in half here and looking at the high bits versus the low bits. Okay, so that's another interpretation of what this is doing. And if you don't like doing division as many computers don't like to do, the these are actually pretty efficient to do. And maybe get some intuition for why they're relevant. So let's move on to recursion, shall we?

I think now we know how this splitting things up works. So I'm going to call the overall structure V or or V e B structure I'm trying to represent is V. And V is going to consist of two parts. One is an array of all the clusters, I'm going to abbreviate V e B for for Van Emde Boas. And recursively, each of those clusters is going to be represented by a smaller V e B structure of size square root of the given one. Okay, so I ranges from zero to square root of U minus one case.

So there's a square root U of them, total size is you. And then in addition, we're going to have a summary structure. And this is also a size square root of you V e B. Okay, so you should think about inserts and successors there. Those are the two operations I care about for now. So let's start with insert.

That's a little easier. So if I want to insert an item X into data structure V, the first thing I should do is insert into its corresponding cluster. So let's just get comfortable with that notation. We're inserting into the cluster whose number is high of X. That's where X belongs. The name of its cluster should be high of X.

And what we're going to be inserting recursively into there is low effects. That's the name of X local to that cluster. X is a global name with respect to V. This cluster only represents a small range of square root of you square root of you items. So this gets us from the big space of size U to the small space of size square root of you within that cluster. So that's basically what high and low were made for.

But then we also have to update the summary structure. So we need just in case maybe it's already there. But in the worst case, it isn't. So we'll just think of that as recursively inserting into V.sumory the name of that cluster, which is high of X. High of X is keeping track of which clusters are non-empty. We've just inserted something into this cluster.

So it's non-empty. We better mark that that cluster high of X is non-empty in the summary structure. Why? So we can do successor. So let's move on to successor. I'm going to mimic the successor that was written on the slide.

So what we had in the non-recursive version was three steps. So we're going to do the same thing here. We're going to look with an X's cluster. We now know that is the cluster known as high of X. And either we find and we're happy or we don't. Then we're going to look at V.sumory search for this, the successor of high of X, right?

Finding the next one bit, that's the successor. And then I want to find the first one bit in that cluster. Is that a successor also? Yeah, that's just the successor of negative infinity. Finding the minimum element in a cluster is the successor of negative one or zero. No, not zero.

But negative one would work, or negative infinity, maybe more intuitively. That will find the smallest thing here. So each of these things is a recursive call. I think of it as recursively calling successor. So let's do that. I want to find the successor of X in V.

So first thing I'm going to do is do the ij breakdown. So let i be high of X and j be, I could do, okay, yeah. So what I'm going to try to, for, okay, what I'm going to do first is to search within this cluster high of X. So I'm going to look for the successor of cluster i, which is cluster high of X of low of X. So that's the first step of looking in X's cluster. V dot cluster is X's cluster.

And then the low X is X's name in the cluster, right? Okay, I'm going to try to find the successor, but it might say infinity. I didn't find anything. And then I'll be unhappy if j equals infinity. So that's line one. Well, then we're in the wrong cluster.

High of X is not the right cluster. So let's find the correct cluster, which is going to be the next non-empty cluster. So I'm going to change i to be the successor in the summary structure of i. So i was the name of a cluster. It might have items in it, but we want to find the next non-empty thing, because we know the successor we're looking for is not here, okay? So we're now in the cluster we belong in.

What item in the cluster do we want? Well, we want to find the minimum item in that cluster. And we're going to do that by a recursive call, which is j is the successor within cluster of i minus infinity. Minus negative one would also work here. So this will find the smallest item in the cluster. And then in both cases, we get i and j, which together in this form describe the value X that we care about.

So I'm just going to say return index of i, j. That's how we reconstruct an item name for the structure V. We knew which substructure it's in. And now we know its name within the substructure within the cluster. Okay, so is this algorithm clearly correct? Yes, but it's also really bad, okay?

It's better than everything we've done so far. The last result we had was square root of U. This is going to be better than that, but still not log log U. Why? Both insert and successor are bad. Okay, I make more than one recursive call to whatever operation, to whatever the operation is here.

Insert calls, insert twice. Here, successor calls, successor potentially three times. Okay, so let's think of it in terms of recurrences. In case that's not clear. So here we have T of U is two times T of square root U. To solve a problem of size U, I solve two problems of size square root of U plus constant, because high of X and low of X, I'm assuming take constant time to do.

It's just I have an integer. If I divide it in half, those are cheap. What does this solve to? It's probably easier to think of it in terms of log U, then we could apply the master method. Right, this is the same thing as T prime of log U is two times T of log U divided by two plus order one. This is not quite the merge sort recurrence, but it's not good.

One way to think of it is we start with the total weight of log U. We split it into log over two, but two copies of it. So we're not saving anything, and we didn't reduce the problem strictly. In terms of the recursion tree, you could just plug this in with the master method, or see that essentially we're covering mass. We started with log U mass. We have two copies of log U over two.

That's the same total mass. So how many recursions do we do? Well, we do log log U recursions. The total number of leaves in that recursion tree is log U. Each of them, we pay constant. So this is log U, not log log U.

To get log log U, we need to change our two coefficient here into a one. We can only refer one recursive call. If we have two recursive calls, we get logarithmic performance. If we have three recursive calls, it's even worse. Now here, for successor, I would definitely use the master method. It's less obvious.

In this case, we get log U to the log base two of three power, which is log U to the 1.6 or so, but worse than log N. This is strictly worse than log N. Time for insert is maybe just a little bit worse than log N, depending on how U relates to N. So we're not there yet, but we're on the right track. We have a kind of the right structure. We have a problem of size U.

We split it into a square root of U sub problems of size U. From a data structure's perspective, this is the first time we're using divide and conquer for data structures. It's a little different from algorithms. So we've seen how data structure is being laid out. But now we're worried about the algorithms on those data structures. Those we can only afford T of U equals one times T squared of U plus order one.

Then we get log log U. So here, we have two recursive calls. Somehow we have to only have one. So let's start by fixing successor. I think that's going to be more intuitive because successor is almost there. A lot of the time, it's just going to make the initial successor v dot cluster i low x call, and we're happy.

The bad case is when we need to make the calls in our if statement, then there's three total, very bad. How can I get rid of the j call in the if statement? I was being all clever that the minimum element is the successor of negative infinity, but that's actually not the right idea. In general, for every structure v, let's store the minimum of cluster i. Why not, right? We know how to augment structures.

Here in 381, you took an AVL tree and you augment nodes to store the subtree size of that node. In this case, we're doing a similar kind of augmentation just for every structure, keep track of what the minimum is. So that's one idea, but I'm going to add something additional here later. But for now, let's store the minimum. So to do an insert into structure v item x, first thing we'll do is if x is the new minimum, maybe x is smaller than v.min. If that's the case, let's just set v.min to x.

And then the rest is the same, same insertion algorithm as before with our two recursive calls. I just spent a constant additional time and now every structure knows its minimum. Again, ignore delete for now. That's trickier. Now every structure knows its minimum, which means we can replace this call with just v.cluster i.min. So one down, here we go, sorry, this one, you can just replace that with what's shown to the right.

So one down, so if we look at successor of v, x, I'm just going to replace that line. Or yeah, so with what's shown by the arrow here. So now we're down to log-e performance. We only have at most two recursive calls. So that's partial progress, but we need another idea to get rid of the second one. And the intuition here is that really only one of these calls should matter.

Okay, so let's look at the big picture. Here's what the recursive thing looks like. We've got v.sumory, and then we've got a cluster zero, cluster one, cluster square root of u minus one. Each of those is a recursive structure. And we're also just storing them in over here as a copy. So when I do a query for the successor of cluster zero, there's kind of two cases.

One situation is that I find the successor somewhere in cluster zero interval. In that case, we're happy because we just need it's the one recursive call. And the other case is that I don't find what I'm looking for there. Then I have to do a successor up in v.sumory, and then I'm done. Then I can teleport into whatever cluster it is, and I've stored them in by now. So that's constant time to jump into the right spot in the cluster.

So either I'll find what I'm looking for in the cluster or I find what I'm looking for in the summary. What would be really nice is if I could tell ahead of time which one is going to succeed, because then I know this is not going to find anything in the cluster. I might as well just go immediately up to the summary and look at the successor in the summary structure. If I know I'm going to find something in the cluster, I'll just do successor there and I'm done. If I could get away with one or the other of these calls, not both, I'd be very happy. How could I tell that?

Okay, how about storing the max? Storing the min and the max then? Why not? I just need a similar line here. If x is bigger than v.max, change the max. So now I've augmented my data structure to have the min and the max at every level.

So that's what's going on here. I won't find an answer if I am greater than or equal to the maximum within the cluster. That's how I tell. If I'm equal to the max or if I'm beyond the max, the max will be to my left. And then I know I will fail within the cluster. So I might as well just go up to summary and do it there.

On the other hand, if I'm less than the max, then I'm guaranteed I'll find something in the cluster so I can just search in there. So I'm going to mimic the code to the left a little bit, at least the first line is going to be i equals high of x. And now that's the cluster I'm starting in. And I want to look at the maximum of that cluster. So I'm looking at v.cluster, i.max, and I want to know is x before that. Now within that cluster, x is known as low of x.

So I compare low of x to clusterize maximum element. If we're strictly to the left, then there is a successor guaranteed within that substructure. And so I should do a successor within v.cluster, i of low of x. Then I found the item I'm looking for. Else I'm beyond the max. I know I'm in the wrong cluster.

And so I should immediately do my i and j lines from before. Well, except I've made the second line use the min, right? So it will only be the one recursive call followed by a min. Okay, so this is going to be i equals the successor within v.summary of high of x, then j is the same line, successor within, oh, well, yeah, the line that I used to have here with the arrow anyways, which is going to be v.cluster, i.min. Okay, and then in both cases, I return index of ij. Okay, so we're essentially doing the same logic as before, although I've replaced the step with min and got rid of the recursive call.

But I'm really only doing one or the other of these things using max to distinguish. If I'm left of the max, I do the successor within cluster high of x. If I'm right of the max, then I do the successor immediately in the summary structure before, because I know this won't find anything useful. And then I find the min within that non-empty structure. And in both cases, ij is the element I'm looking for. I can put it back together with index.

Okay, so what's the running time of successor now? It is log, log u, okay, which is awesome. So we finished successor. Sadly, we have not finished insert yet. Insert still takes log u time, but we made progress. Maybe your rounding table doesn't change that often.

So you can afford to pay some extra time for insert as long as you can route packets really fast, as long as you can find where something belongs. The successor in is log log u time, right? But again, most of the time, this should be fine, right? Most of the time we insert into cluster high of x, low of x, and we're done. As long as there is something already in that cluster, we don't need to update the summary structure. As long as high of x has already been inserted into the summary structure, we can get away with just this first step.

The tricky part is detecting. How would we know? Well, that's not enough just to detect it. If high of x is not in v.summary, we have to do this insert. We can't get away with it. But that's kind of rare.

That only happens the very first time you insert into that cluster. Every subsequent time, it's going to be really cheap. We just have to do our first line of gum showed here. It's easy enough to keep track of whether a cluster is empty. For example, we're storing the min. We can say v.min is none, special value, whenever the structure v is empty.

But we still have this problem that the first time we insert into a cluster, it's expensive because we have to run both lines. How could we avoid, in the case where a cluster is empty, remember, an overall structure? Anyway, we can tell that it's empty by saying min equals none. Let's say, what could I do to speed up inserting into an empty cluster? Because I'm first going to have to insert into the empty cluster, then I'm going to have to insert into the summary. I can't get away from inserting into the summary.

I like inserting into the cluster to become cheap. In the special case, when the cluster is empty, especially, right? When I insert into, oops, there we go. Put it back. When I insert into an empty structure, I'm just going to have a little lazy field or something. I'm going to put the item in there.

Then the next time I insert into it, maybe I'll carry it down a little bit. That should work. It's a little more complicated than the solution I had in mind. I'm going to just unify that lazy field with my minimum field. Say when I insert into a structure, if there's nothing here, I'm just going to put the item in min and not recurse. I'm just not going to store the minimum item recursively.

There's another idea for our list of improvements here. Idea is don't store the min recursively. This is effectively equivalent to that lazy field. If the min field is blank, store the item there. If the structure is empty, I'm going to set v.min equal to x. Let's look at it with some code here.

Here's what I mean. If v.min is special, none value, we're using Python notation here, then I'm just going to set v.min equal to x. I should also set v.max equal to x because I want to keep track of the maximum and then stop, return. That's all I'll do for inserting into an empty structure is stick it in the max field. This may seem like a minor change, but it's going to make inserting into a cluster cheap. The rest of the algorithm is going to be pretty similar.

There's a couple of annoying special cases, which is we have to keep the min up to date and we have to keep the max up to date in general. This one's easy. We just set v.max equal to x because we're not doing anything fancy with max. Min is a little special because if we're inserting an item smaller than the current min, then really x belongs in that slot and then whatever was in there needs to be recursively inserted. I'm going to say swap x with v.min online five here. I'm going to put x into the v.min slot and then I'm going to pull out whatever item was in there and call it x now.

Now my remaining goal is to insert x into the rest of the structure. There's only one item that gets this freedom of not being recursively stored and it's always going to be the minimum one. This way the new value x goes there. Whatever used to be there now has to be recursively inserted because every item except the minimum, we're going to recursively insert. The rest is pretty much the same, but we're going to instead of always inserting into the summary structure, we're going to see whether it's necessary because we know how to do that. We just look at the cluster high of x and we see it's empty.

Cluster high of x and empty means its minimum is none. We're going to, in fact, the next line after this one, line 10, is going to be insert v cluster high of x, comma, low of x. That's the same as we had before. We're always going to do that. In the special case where there was not previously nothing in v cluster high of x, we need to update the summary structure and we do that with our same original line. I'm going to insert into v dot summary high of x on line 9, but I'm only going to do that in the case when I need to.

If it was already non-empty, I know this has already happened, so I don't need to bother with the insertion. This is a weird algorithm, but it doesn't look much better. In the worst case, we're doing two recursive calls but I claim this runs in log u time because I get the t of u equals 1 times square root of t of u plus order 1 recurrence. All the work I'm doing here is constant other than the recursive calls. Now our successor algorithm is pretty wrong at this point because sometimes I'm storing elements in v dot min and successor is just completely ignoring them, so it's not going to find those items. Luckily, it's a pretty simple fix.

If v is less than v dot min, return v dot min, that's all we need to do. The min is special because we're not storing it recursively and so we can't rely on all of our recursive structures. We can't rely on cluster i, we can't rely on summary on reporting about v dot min. v dot min is just a special item sitting there. It's represented nowhere else, but we can check because it's the minimum element and we're looking for successors. It's really easy to check whether it's the item that we're looking for because it's the smallest one. If we're smaller than it, then that's clearly the successor.

In that case, we just spent constant time, so it actually speeds up some of the situations for a successor. We're not exploiting that here. It doesn't help much in the worst case, but now it should be correct. At this point, we have what I will call van emde boos. This last version, we can do insert and successor in log, log u time. Now, one thing I've been avoiding is delete.

Let me give you some delete codes. It's a little bit long. Let's talk about just sort of the main cases in here. Deleting the min is a little bit special, as you might imagine. That element is very different from every other element. If x equals min, we're going to do something else, but I'll specify that later.

Line, well, yeah, okay. Line 7, we're going to delete low of x from cluster high of x. That's the obvious recursion to do. In all cases, delete has to do that other than the special case of the min. After we delete online 8 here, we can check, is that structure empty? Because then the min would equal none.

If that's the case, we delete from the summary structure. Then there's a bit of a special case at the end, which is when we deleted the maximum element starting online 11. When we delete from the summary structure, we want the line 7 to the 7 delete to have taken only constant time, no recursions. That's going to correspond to the case from line 1. If we made the cluster empty, this means we deleted the last item. What's the last item?

Has to be v.min. If you have size 1 structure, it's always because that item is in v.min. Everything else is empty. That's the case of deleting v.min. We want this case to take constant time when it's the last item we're deleting. Let me tell you a couple of other things.

One is there's a matching lower bound. Maybe you wonder, can I get log, log, log time? Log, log, log time or whatever. No. In most reasonable choices of parameters, it's a little bit more complicated than this, but for most of the time that you care about, log, log, you is the right answer. Second thing is space is order U.

To store our binary tree that we made earlier takes order U space. We'd really like to spend order N space. The main idea here is only store non-empty clusters. Pretty simple idea. We want to spend space only for the present items, not for the absent ones. Don't store the absent ones.

In particular, we're doing all this work around, we're doing all this, what's that, work around, work around. We're doing all this work around when clusters are empty, in which case we can see that just by looking at the min item or when they're non-empty. Let's just store the non-empty ones. That will get you down almost to order N space, but not quite close. To do this, v.cluster is no longer in array. Let's just make it a hash table, a dictionary in Python.

We were always doing v.cluster of I, just make that into a dictionary instead of an array, and you save most of the space. You only have to store the non-empty items, and you should know from earlier in this class, hash table is constant, expected. We'll prove that formally later, but for now, take hashing as a given. Everything we did before is essentially the same cost, but an expectation, no longer a worst case. But for now, the space goes way down because if you look at an item, when you insert an item, it goes up to log, log U, different places in the worst case. We end up with log, log U, we end up with N log, log U space, which is pretty good, almost linear.

There is a fix for reducing this further to order N. The idea is you're not responsible for knowing this, but just in case you're curious, the idea is instead of going all the way down in the recursion at the very bottom, you say, normally, if you stop the recursion when you have U equals 1, just stop the recursion when N is very small, like log, log U. When I'm only storing log, log U items, put them in a linked list. I don't care. You can do whatever you want on log, log U items in log, log U time. It's just a tiny tweak, but it turns out it gets rid of the log U in the space.

It's a little bit messier. I don't know if you want to implement that way, but you can reduce to linear space. That's BEB. Kind of fun. We'll see you next time.