Okay, so last time we looked at the search problem that we talked about earlier and we showed that in a certain model of computation where I could only compare two objects that I'm storing that I'm storing and get some constant number of outputs on what I could, how I could identify these things like equal or less than or something like that. And we drew a decision tree and we got this bound that if we had n outputs we would require our decision tree to be at least log n height. Today let me... Okay. Okay. So in this model I can't find the things faster than log n time but luckily we're in a model of computation which has a stronger operation namely random accessing. And if we stored the things that we're looking for we have unique keys and those keys are integers then if I have an item with key k, if I store it at index k in my array then I can find and manipulate it in constant time. Right? That's pretty cool. That's what we call a direct access array. A direct access array really not different than a regular array except how you're using it when we were talking about sequences is we are giving extrinsic semantics to the slots where we're storing these things. Actually I could put any item in any slot where it was in my array had nothing to do with what those things were. Here we're imposing intrinsic semantics on my array that if I have an item with key k it must be at index k. That's the thing that we're taking advantage of here. And then we can use this nice powerful linear branching random access operation to find that thing in constant time because that's our model of computation here. Okay, then what was the problem with our direct access array? Space. Space, right? So we had to initiate a direct access array that was the size of the space of our keys. In general my index location could go from zero to some positive number. If I had a very large positive numbers, remember we were searching among your BYU IDs, I'd have to have a direct access array that spanned the space of possible keys you could have. Okay, sorry, trying to make sense of all this for you guys. And that could be much larger than n. And so the rest of the time last we talked about how to fix that space problem. We can reduce the space by taking that larger key space from zero to U which could be very large and map it down to a small space. In general if I gave you a fixed hash function there that's not going to be good for all inputs. If your inputs are very well distributed over the key space then that is good. But in general there would be hash functions with some inputs that would be bad. That's what we argued, remember? And so for the rest of the time there we talked about hash families, choosing a hash function randomly from among a large set of hash functions which had a property that if I chose this thing randomly and you're generating your input, you didn't know which random numbers I was picking. The expectation over my random choice, me, I'm the one running the algorithm not you giving me the input that random choice. My algorithm actually behaves really well in expectation. In particular I got constant time for finding, inserting and deleting into the state of structure in our expectation, remember? We did a little proof of that the chain links where we stored collisions in our hash function in our hash table, sorry. Those wouldn't be very long and so if they were constant then I don't have to search more than a constant number of things when I go into a hash index location. Okay, hopefully everyone remembers what we talked about last time. I didn't show you this chart at the end. I'm showing you now. Essentially what we had was we have a bunch of different ways to deal with the set interface. The last time we talked about the sorted array and then we talked about this direct access array and this hash table which do better for these dictionary, the find and insert and delete operations or at least better in that expected sense and that expectation sense. What's the worst case performance of a hash table? If I have to look up something in a hash table and I happen to choose a bad hash function, what's the worst case here? Just think about that. It's n, right? It's n. It's worse than a sorted array because potentially I hashed everything that I was sorting to the same index in my hash table and to be able to distinguish between them I can't do anything more than a linear search. I could store another set's data structure as my chain and do better that way. That's actually how Java does it. They store a data structure we're going to be talking about in the next lectures as the chain so that they can get worse. Worst case, log n. But in general, that hash table is only good if we're allowing, okay, I want this to be expected good but in the worst case, if I really need that operation to be worst case, I really can't afford linear time ever for an operation of that kind. Then I don't want to use a hash table. Here I want to note too, what does the subscript e mean here? In this chart, I put a subscript on this and if I put an expected subscript on this, that means expected runtime. A meaning this is an amortized runtime. At the end, last time, we talked about how if we had too many things in our hash table, then as long as we didn't do it too often, and this is like a little hand wavey argument here, but the same kinds of ideas as the dynamic array, whenever we got a linear, we want more than a linear factor away from where we're trying. Basically, the fill factor we were trying to be, then we could just completely rebuild that hash table with a new hash function randomly chosen from our hash table with a new size, and we could get amortized bounds. That's how Python implements dictionaries or sets or even objects when it's trying to map keys to different things. That's hash tables. Great. The key thing here is, well, actually, if your range of keys is small or if you as a programmer have the ability to choose the keys that you identify your objects with, then you can actually choose that range to be small, to be linear, to be small with respect to your items. You don't need a hash table. You can use a direct access array because if you know your key space is small, that's great. A lot of C programmers probably would like to do something like that because they don't have access to, maybe C++ programmers would have access to their hash table. Today, instead of talking about searching, we're going to talk about sorting. Last lectures, we saw a few ways to do sort. Some of them were quadratic, insertion sort, selection sort, and then we had one that was N log N. And this thing, N log N, seemed pretty good, but can I do better? Can I do better? One thing, what we're going to show at the beginning of this class is in this comparison model, no. N log N here, I'll move us to here so we can see. N log N is optimal and we're going to go through the exact same line of reasoning that we had last time. So in our comparison model, what did we use when we were trying to make this argument that any comparison model algorithm was going to take at least log N time? Do you remember? What we did was we said, okay, I can think of any model in the comparison model, any algorithm in the comparison model, as kind of this some comparisons happen, right? They branch in, I pulled a better picture last time I just drew in the slides and anyway, so I try to get a better picture this time. But they branch in a binary sense. But you could have it generalized to any constant branching factor, but for our purposes, binary is fine, right? And what we said was there are at least N outputs, really N plus one, but at least order N outputs and we showed that, or we argue to you, that the height of this tree had to be at least log N, log the number of leaps, right? It had to be at least log times number or log of the number of leaps. That was the height of our decision tree. And if this decision tree represented a search algorithm, I had to walk down and perform these comparisons in order, reach a leaf where I would output something. And if the minimum height of any binary tree on a linear number of leaves is log N, then any algorithm in the comparison model also has to take log N of time, because it has to do that many comparisons to differentiate between all those possible outputs. Hopefully, hopefully that's making sense. All right, so in the sort problem, how many possible outputs are there? What is the output of a sorting algorithm? A list in particular, given some input, some set of items, A that has size N, what I'm going to give you is some permutation of that list, right? So for each index, I could tell you where it goes. Another way I could say is where does the first item go? Where does the second item go? Where does the third item go? Blah, blah, blah, something like that. So how many different choices of a permutation are there? Well, how many choices do I have for the first thing of where it could be in the final sorted array? It could be any of them, right? So that's N. How about the next one? The next one. Well, it can't go where the first one went, right? But it can go anywhere else. So it's N minus one. And since these are independent choices I'm making, if I multiply them all together, I get nine factorial permutations that are the number of possible outcomes that I have to my sorting algorithm. So for me to have an output to my sorting algorithm be correct, I need at least N factorial leaves here. The nice thing about doing this last time is it's the nice thing about doing this last time is this really just got the number of leaves. So what's the number of leaves? It's omega N factorial here. Here. Anyway, it's we have N factorial. I've seen some people maybe try to call this theta N factorial as well. So you might see that both ways. But we've got we've got omega N factorial here. So it's at least omega N factorial. It's at least this many. There are many algorithms that if I got, it could take two different routes to get the same output. So it's, this is a lower bound on the number of leaves here. We're not claiming theta quite yet. So what this argument is saying is that if I just replace the number of leaves in here with N factorial, I get a similar comparison sort lower bound. So what is log N log of N factorial? One thing I could do is I could put in sterling formula, right? If you guys are familiar with that. And that'll give me some of the form and log N. I've kind of tried to substitute here. You're going down on the slide. What's another way that I could lower bound and factorial? Well, I've got a bunch of things here that's in factorial half of these. So I'm saying N over two, half of these N over two are bigger than or equal to N over two, right? That kind of makes sense. So I can certainly lower bound this by N over two to the N over two. That's a little easier thing to maybe take the log of. If you take the log of that, that's asymptotically N log N. So what we're, what I'm getting at here is any sorting algorithm here takes at least N log N comparisons. And so a merge sort, that's the best we can do. Hopefully that makes sense to everybody. We're just piggybacking on the analysis we had about decision trees, connecting the leaves with the minimum height of any binary tree on that. Number of leaves and replacing that N with N factorial. So not super interesting. You can just plug in the sterling formula. I did this. So might as well clarify. There are N terms here in the product. Half of them are at least N over two. I can lower bound this product by something smaller than half of the terms, a product of that, and that'll be fine. So I'm just taking N over two of them. I'm multiplying N over two all together and over two times. Okay. It's just providing a lower bound. I need something that's smaller than all of these terms and multiplying them all together like that, that, that will give me a lower bound. So we can't do better than N log N in the comparison model, but what did the last lectures, what did, what did we do in last lectures? We used random access in a direct access array to do better. Can you think of how to use that idea to sort faster? I'm going to give you a caveat here. I'm going to let you assume that the keys of the things that you're trying to sort are unique. Okay. And stay there in a bound in a small range. How can I use direct access array to sort faster? It's, it's, it's something that, that I like to call direct access array sort. We won't really call it that because there's something much more general that we'll talk about in just a second. But let me in right here. Okay. So I'm, I'm assuming that this big direct access array of the space of my keys, and I take each one of the items in the things that I'm trying to sort. I look at each one of their keys and I stick it in the direct, the direct accessory exactly where it needs to go in constant time. That's great. Now I gave you this caveat that all the keys were unique. So I don't have to deal with collisions here, right? But then after I'm done with this, all of these are now in sorted order. And what I can do is I can just walk down the list. A lot of these cells, cells are empty potentially. Some of the keys might not, not be there. But what I can do is just walk down the list, pick off every item that does exist, stick them in an array. I'm done, right? Stick, stick the key in there and then, and then all right, make direct access array. Store, store items, item X in index, X dot key. Walk down the access array and return item seen in order. Hopefully this is making sense. All right, so how, how long does this step take? Building a direct access array. Order, order you, right? So this is order you. How long does this take? How, how many items do you have to insert? Right, order, order N or just N and how long does it take each one of these things? How long does it take to insert? I should say each one of these things into my direct access array. Worst case, constant time. So this would be N times worst case, constant time. Great. How long, how long does the last one take this walk, walking down? Oh, a view also, right? Because we're walking down the entire length of view. So this algorithm takes in total N plus you time. This is great. You is bigger than N because we've assumed distinct keys here. But if you is on the order of N, then, then we now have linear time sorting algorithm. Each of the keys in this case, it has to be a number. We, we do this to talk about sorting algorithms generally so that we don't have to deal with the potential if these keys have values associated with or, or other. Stuff associated to putting them on that item and they'll still be there. But in general, if you just wanted to sort integers, you could say that dot key is points back to the object itself. If you want to just some sort, sort, if you want to just sort some integers. Okay, so, so that gives us a linear time algorithm when you is small. And under this condition, that I have unique keys when I want to sort. Those are fairly restrictive. So we might want to generalize this a little bit. Okay, so, so that's direct access array sort. What if we had a set of keys that was that was a little larger. Okay, what if we what. What if we expand this a little bit say say you is less than n squared. Okay, this is now bigger range and if we, and if we had a direct access array of quadratic size, we'd have a quadratic time algorithm. This is not helpful. So can you think of a way in which we could sort integers that are between zero and n squared. Maybe like using the stuff that that we have been talking about earlier. Okay, maybe we could break this larger, you know, our larger number into two smaller numbers. Any integer that's between zero and n squared can be written as key can be some a and b, where a is essentially the higher end and B is the lower end, right. That's kind of weird. So, what do I mean by this I mean that let's let a bk when I divide it by n integer the floor key integer is to divide by n and B equals k mod n. So this is a number that's less than n, and that is a number and, and this is a number that's less than it. And actually, I can recover k at any time by saying k equals a n plus B. I've essentially decomposed it into a base and representation of this number, and I have two digits in that number. This is the nth and digit and this is the ones digit right. This first value here, same value here. Okay, so now let's say that we have this list of numbers. We've got 17, 324 2212 here. We've got five numbers. So what's n in this case and is five. So not super interesting. But we're going to represent this as five pairs of numbers that are each within the bounds of zero to four. That makes sense. So, so what is my AB representation of of 17. Okay, so there's, there are three times five plus two. That's good. So what so when we have all these written down, I put them to to the right here. So we have three to zero three, four, four, two, two. Okay, so now I just have a bunch of things that I want to sort based on this function that I have. These are no longer just integers that I need to sort I need to sort by this transformation of this thing into a number. So anyway, do you have any ideas on hopefully you're thinking on how we can do this. We could. Oh, by the way, these are both constant time operations on your computer as long as it's an integer division. And this is mod. Python also has a nice thing. I think it's, I think it's in standard operations, which is div mod. I kind of showed it here of K and so if you want to use that you can. Okay, so how do we sort these, these tuples, these are called tuples. Hopefully you're familiar with with tuples by now how do we sort tuples what's the most important digit of this thing if I had to sort one of the digits and get something that's close to sorted what's more important the ones digit or the ends digit, where again that first value is the end digit and the second is the one. I could vary be all I want, right with with the same a if I change a by one. It doesn't matter what B is it's going to be bigger right does that make sense. So the the K is much more sensitive to a than it is to be. The K is more important than B. So if I just wanted to get some linear time algorithm, I could just sort by their bigger digits and hope they don't differ very much on the smaller things. Right, does that make sense. Okay, let's, let's take a look at this I need to sort on on both in some sense right what I'm going to tell you right now is an algorithm that I like to call tuples sort. You can also think of it like an expel or Excel spreadsheet sort. You know we have a bunch of a spreadsheet of a bunch of data I have a prioritization on how important the keys are to me those columns. And if you have a very important column and an order of the columns of how important they are you can repeatedly sort on those columns until they're sorted based on preference. That's something that you guys may have done. If I have an ordering on the preferences of my columns, do I start by sorting all of them on the most important thing or the least important thing. Okay, let's try it out. Okay, so to resort let's let's start by by sorting these things by least significant first, and then no, no, okay, let's let's do most significant first and then least significant. That's the first way that I phrase that to you I think. So, alright so so these are the most significant things the first ones. And the things that are less significant seconds. Instead of writing it as tuples I wrote them as 320344 that's just base five representation here. So let's start by sorting all these things by the most significant thing how how do we do that. Right, first one, zero three, second one to two, next one, three, two, four, two, then 44. Maybe right maybe four, four, four, two. So we've sorted it by by least significant or sorry most significant, the leading term. And now I'm going to start sort by least significant so what's the least significant here 22 then to is also have another two, another two. There's a three and and there's your sorted list. So why did that not work. Why did that not work doing it doing it that way sorting by most significant then least significant. What happened is, I, I didn't take, I did take into account the significant digit sort, but when I did the less significant thing erased all of my work from the first sort. Right, in the case of ties, we want the more significant thing to take precedence so we want to do that thing last. Does that make sense. So the right way to do this. This was most significant first is bad, not good. All right, let's try the least significant thing first let's try that so least significant here's two. So we have we have 3242202 and then 44. So we have sound good. So least significant first now I do most significant I sort the most significant thing. So what's the most significant thing. 0322 here, 3 to most significant for and 42. Okay, we're sorted right. I did wait, I, you know, I did what I said I was going to do. I sort of buy the most significant thing what's the problem here what what did I do wrong here. I'm going to do this and you, you want to put the 42 first and 44 last right because 42 came first in the input and 44 came second right. Okay, so if a sorting algorithm maintains this property that if they are the same thing then the output maintains their order from the input to the output, their relative order. So we call a stable sorting algorithm. And so if we have a stable sorting algorithm when we're doing to pull sort. When we're sorting on different keys or columns of the set, we really want to be using a state a stable sorting algorithm, because otherwise we may mess up work we did before in a previous sort of the less significant thing. So we want a stable sorting algorithm here, because then we will end up sorting sorting our thing correctly. Okay. So hopefully, hopefully that makes sense. Okay, so let's, how long, how long with this take. Let's say, let's say we didn't use half of the more set the more significant set of digits let's say I'm only using n over to, or, or, I guess that's that's not quite what I to get. It's not quite going to get what I want. So, so what we're going to do if we have direct access array sort. If I then go, go into each one of these digits and try to sort those things that are in there and that's going to take some time. It's going to take time for each of those digits there might be a ton of collisions into one of the things. And so it might take more time to sort that than linear. Hopefully that makes sense. So, I would prefer to do this this tuple sort kind of behavior sorting the the smaller things sorting the bigger thing. And because I only have a constant number of things in my tuples. This is important because I only have have two things I'm worried about here. I only have to do two passes of the sorting algorithm to be able to sort these numbers. However, can I use direct access array sort here. What was the initial stipulation we had on direct access arrays. That the keys were unique right. Oh, jump again sorry that the keys were unique right and that's exact opposite of what we have here we have things that could be the same. So we give up right we can't do what are we doing instead. Well, why can't we just put more things in a key. Why can't we put a list there right that's exactly what we do. This is called counting sort and you guys were already seeing it because I actually advanced the slides. But this is called counting sort. And what we do here is we still have this direct access array of space zero to you minus one shown. But instead of sorting one thing here at each key K, we store a pointer to a chain. Okay, this sounds like hashing right, but the important thing is that I need to make sure as I'm inserting things in here that I'm maintaining the order in which they came in. And just throw them in willy nilly, or else we have this problem that we that we had before. So what I, so I need what I would say is sequence data structure something that will maintain the order, the extrinsic order that I had when I'm putting these things in. So as I have multiple things with K, I'm going to put them in order. I can put, you know, have a have a pointer to a dynamic array or a linked list where I just add things to the end. And then at the end of my algorithm when I read off the things, I can just look at anyone that has a non empty data structure under here and read them off in the order that they came. For example, I'm just going to do this last step from from that first row down to the second row. I'm going to have this direct access array with 01234 on the slots. So how am I going to do this, this counting sort. Now, we have, as a reminder, we have 3240 to 2203 and 44. Okay, so I can take the first one 32. I'm sorting by the most significant thing I, I stick it here, right. Then I can place 42, then I can place 22. And so on this is not so much different yet than dynamic array direct direct access to race or. I'm going to get to this duplicate here for 244. When we get to the duplicate 44 here. Now we have two things in this thing and because we're keeping them in order of the sequence, I'm appending it to the end. Then, when I go in and read off the different things and I'm returning them. It'll be in a stable way, which is what what we want. It's not overriding the work that we did on the lower significant digits. Okay. So, so how long does this take then you can see it here but this this also takes order and plus you because I'm instantiating this thing of size you and then how big are these data structures. Well, maybe I'm storing one, a constant amount for each index. So that's a you overhead. And then I'm paying one for every item. I'm storing right. So, these things are only blanks some some of their lengths is and because I'm only storing and things in there so the total amount of space the total work I have to do is is order I need to be able to spend in constant time I need to be able to cycle through these things iterate over them in linear time. But if I have that, I get and plus you. Okay. Um, one, one question that I that I see a lot with this topic is, is how do I ensure that that these that these things in these lists where they collide. How do you ensure that they're sorted. I don't. I just ensure that they came in order that they came. But as long as I sorted the lower order digits correctly and the previous things, then I'm assuming that their order as they come in will be sorted. So, when they collide, that's the assumption here that's the reason why I'm doing these these building up from the least significant to the most significant is so I know that when they collide the underlying stuff there is sorted already in the input. So, counting sort is is general for any you I just happened to pick you being in, in this case, when I broke this thing up into n squared, but the general concept is, it doesn't matter what I choose to use for you. Okay, we will use that right now to sort larger ranges of numbers. This was exactly the idea we're going to combine to pull sort use counting sort as its auxiliary sorting, stable sorting algorithm to do all its work on these digits. And so to sort on n squared numbers, I get linear time, which is great because you is in in this case. And we extend that what if what if we had n cubed how many digits will we have there, how many size n digits, what we need to represent a number of size and cute job any ideas here. What do we do well we divide it off an end, we took it and stored it were left with something of size and if I had a number of size and cute I could divide often in I'm left with something of n squared. So how to deal with something of n squared. Well actually we do we can split it up into two size and numbers. So if I had numbers bound upper bounded by a cubic and cubed, I could split it up into three digits, three is still constant. And so I could split it up into three digits to will sort them in their increasing priority and sort those. Again, I'm doing linear work per digit. I have a constant number of digits. So I get a linear time algorithm. So it's always going to be big O of n plus you because I'm bounding my digit size to be and you is in here right so so I'm getting linear time. Okay, the idea here, we're going to call this, this is called radix sort, radix sort we break up integers max size of you into base and tuple. So basically each one of my digits can range from zero to n. How many base and digits do I have. Do I have if I have a number of size you. Yeah, that's what I'm trying to ask if I have a number of size you. Okay, well it's shown here, but log n of you, number of digits is log n of you log base log base n of you, and then to pull sort on digits using counting sort from least to most significant. That's the algorithm. How long does that take, how long does it take to to sort on a digit that spans the key zero to n linear time right order and time. Sometimes I have to do the tuple sort, the number of digits times right. So the running time of this algorithm first, we have to do the first stuff break up break up each of the integers that takes n time, n times the number of digits. I had to create each one of these tuples so n plus n times the number of digits log base n of you. So here I had to loop through all the things. And then for each thing I broke it up into log base and of you digits. And that's how long the first thing took. And then how long did it take me back, how long did it take me excuse me to get back to tuple sort and time per digit right. So we also have this other factor. Hopefully this will make it sense. And how long is that those that good is that bad for for what values of you is this linear time. Well, if you is less than n to the C for some constant C, then the C comes out of the logarithm and logarithm logarithm log n event is one, and then we get a linear time algorithm. Okay, so that's how we can sort in linear time if our things are only polynomially large. We're so in counting sort, we get n plus you in radix sort here all here in radix sort. We also get a stable sorting algorithm where the running time is n plus n times log base and of you. And then in the situations where, oh, I want to know to there. There's a typo in counting sort that that should be written when you is. Order and counting, counting short runs in linear time. And it's linear time also in the case of of radix sort. If our things are bounded by a polynomial in n by n to the C for some constant seat. Okay, so that's that's how we sort in in linear time with the caveat that your numbers aren't too big. Okay, see you next time.