Good morning. Okay, let's just jump right into course content. What's this course about? It's about algorithms. It's about an introduction to algorithms. It's about complexity of algorithms. Really what this course is about is teaching you to solve computational problems. We are going to take it a step further than that. It's not just about teaching you to solve computational problems. Our first goal is to solve computational problems, and our second goal is communicating those solutions to others and being able to communicate that your way of solving the problem is both correct and efficient. So yes, this class is about algorithms, of course, but it's about two more things. It's about proving correctness and arguing efficiency. It's about communication of these ideas. We'll be doing both writing and coding in this class, because what good are our algorithms if we can't communicate through writing their function and their purpose? Of course, solving the computational problem is important, but really the thing that you're getting out of this class that we really concentrate on is being able to prove that the things you're doing are correct and better than other things, and being able to communicate those ideas to other, and not just to your computer, to other people and convince them that it's correct. So that's what this class is about. So what do I mean when I say solve a computational problem? Think about that. What is a problem? What is an algorithm? People make fun of me for starting with this question in class, but really think about that. What is a problem computationally? I'll give you just a second. One answer I hear often is something you want to compute, and yes, that's true, but a little more abstractly here. What I'm going for is we have a set of inputs. Maybe I have one, one, two, three, four, five possible inputs that I could have to my algorithm, and then I have a space of outputs. Maybe I have more outputs than I do inputs, but these are possible outputs to my problem. And what a problem is, is a binary relation between these inputs and these outputs. Essentially for each input, I specify which of these outputs is correct. It doesn't necessarily have to be one. If I say, give me the index in an array containing the value five, there could be multiple fives in that array. So any of those indices would be correct. Maybe anyway, so maybe our inputs map to our outputs differently. Maybe one input has three outputs. There's some kind of mapping there, but those mapped edges from our inputs to our outputs would represent that binary relation. It's kind of a graph, a bipartite graph, between these inputs and these outputs. And that's really what the formal definition of a problem is, at least how I define it for this class. Generally, if I have a problem, a computational problem, that I'm not going to specify the problem to by saying, okay, for input one, the correct answer is zero, and for input two, the correct answer is three, and so on and so forth, that would take me forever. Right? So usually what would that be? That would be a very simple question. So I can just write my input and then I can just say, okay, this is my input and this is the answer, so I can just say, we do when defining a problem is specify some kind of predicate saying that, oh, we can check if I give you an input and an output, I can check whether that output is correct or not. That's usually how we define what a problem is. And if I am checking whether this index contains a five, I can just go to that array, look at index five or the index that you gave me and see if it equals five. So usually we're putting it in terms of the predicates because in general, we don't really want to talk about small instances of problems, right? I kind of, I mentioned this briefly in my introduction video here. In this class, we care about large, and we're talking, we're talking large instances of problems here, big data. So let's say I have a problem of, maybe you guys have heard this, among the students in this classroom, do any pair of you have the same birthday? Well, probably if there's more than 365 of you, the answer is yes, right? By what do you know? What by the, it's called pigeonhole principle. Two of you must have the same birthday, but let's generalize that a little bit. Say, I don't know, maybe, maybe I need a bigger space of birthdays for this question to be interesting to you. Maybe let's tack on the year that you were born. Maybe let's tack on the hour that you were born. So that's a bigger space of inputs. And I, I wouldn't then necessarily expect two of you again, if there were 365 of you, then I wouldn't necessarily expect, the two of you would be born in the same year on the same day and the same hour and the same second in the same hospital and so forth. Right. That would be a little less likely. In fact, as long as that space is larger than something like the square of the number of you, then I'm, then I'm less likely to, to even have a pair of you. That's the birthday problem. Again, you may have seen potentially, but in general, I want a deterministic algorithm right away of checking whether two of you have the same, birthday. So in general, in this class, we're, we're not going to concentrate on inputs such as, is there a pair of you in this class that have the same birthday that's kind of boring, right? I could do a lot of, a lot of different things there, but what we do in this class, this is a, this is for a fixed classroom of you. I want to make an algorithm that can be generalized to any classroom, to any department, to any university. I want an algorithm that not only applies to this classroom, but also to my database design class. So I want to make an algorithm that applies to this class that I, that I also teach or to the class you have before mine. I want an algorithm that can change its, it can accept an arbitrary sized input. Here we have a class of maybe 20, 30 students, but, but I want an algorithm to work for a billion students. Maybe I'm trying to check if there's a match of something in, in the Facebook database or something like that. So we're looking for general problems that have arbitrary sized inputs. So I want an algorithm that can change its, it can accept an arbitrary sized inputs. And these inputs could grow very large, but we want kind of a fixed size algorithm to solve those problems. So, so we've talked about a problem now. What, what's an algorithm then? An algorithm is a little different than a problem, a problem specification. I can tell you what this graph looks like. An algorithm, really, I don't know what the outputs are. I don't know what these edges are, right? And when I'm, when I'm saying, what the graph looks like in my head, I can picture, as we were talking about mapping inputs to outputs, things like that. But, but I don't know what the outputs are for a generalized problem, right? We, some of these problems are so large that you, you rely on your algorithm for that. So we don't know what the edges would look like of our graph. But I want a fixed size machine or procedure that if I give it an input, it will generate an output. And if it generates an output, it better be one of the correct outputs. So I have an algorithm that takes in this input. And I really want that specific output or else it's not a correct algorithm. Anyway, hopefully, hopefully that makes sense. An algorithm solves the problem if it returns a correct output for every problem input that's in our domain. So do you know a possible algorithm for checking whether any two of you have the same birthday as specified? I'll let you think about this for a second. Again, maybe you've seen it, maybe you haven't. I'll give you one idea. What if I put you guys in some order? I'm going to give each of you a number, one through however many number of students are in this class. And I'm going to interview you one by one. I'm going to say, what's your birthday? And then I'm going to write it down. I'm going to put you on some kind of record. And then as I keep interviewing you, I am going to give you a number. And then I'm going to give you a number. And then I'm going to find out your birthday. I'm going to check my record. I'm going to look through all the birthdays I have in the record. And if I find a match, then I return, yay, found a pair and I can stop. Otherwise, if I get through my record list and I don't, I don't find a match. I just stick you at the end of my record. I add you to the record and then I move to the next person and keep doing that. Right. So that's, that's a proposed algorithm for this birthday problem. Um, where let's put it in steps then, right. I can maintain a record interview students in some order. Um, and, and I guess we should say, what does interviewing mean? It means two things. It means, uh, checking if birthday is in the record, if yes, return pair. So, um, anyway, and then otherwise add a new student to that record. And then at the very end, if I go through everybody and I haven't found a match yet, I'm going to return that there is, is none. Um, so what we just did together, that's, that's what I would call a statement of an algorithm. That's the kind of level of description that I'd be looking for you to provide me with on any problem sets or exercises in this class. Um, it's a verbal description in words that it's, it's probably not enough for a computer to know what to do. But if you said this algorithm to any one of your friends in this class, they would at least understand what it is we're trying to do. Um, I, I get this question frequently in this class is an algorithm, like a plan people, people ask that is an algorithm, like a plan and yeah, an algorithm is a procedure that somehow I can do whatever I want, but I have to take one of my inputs and I have to produce an output. And at the end it's, it's a correct output. So it is, it's just a procedure. You can think of it as a recipe. I said, I, I don't like to cook, but you can think of it as a recipe. Um, it's just some kind of procedure. It's a sequence of things that you should do. And then at the end, you'll return a correct output. So we have a possible, a simple algorithm for solving our birthday problem. Now I've given you what I argue to you, or I'm asserting to you is a solution to this birthday problem. And maybe you guys agree with me. Maybe, maybe some of you don't. Um, so how would I convince you that this is correct? If I was just running this algorithm algorithm on say, uh, say four students in this class here, I could argue it pretty well to you, right? I could assign those four people birthdays in various combinations of either of their, you know, none of them have the same birthday, some of the, some two of them have the same birthday, whatever I could try all possibilities. And I could go through lots of different possibilities. Um, and I would just need to check that the algorithm returns the right answer in all such cases. But when I, if I had, you know, 300 of you, that would take me a little bit longer to argue. That'd be a little more difficult to argue my algorithms correctness. Uh, so if I want to argue something is correct. If I, if I want to prove something to you, I'm going to have to do it in a way that's more accurate. So I'm going to have to do it in a way that's more accurate. So I'm going to have to do it in a way that's more accurate. So I'm going to I'm looking for one word. Um, I'm looking for induction, right? Uh, in general, what we do in this class as a computer scientists, uh, we, we write a constant size piece of code that can take on any average or arbitrary arbitrarily large size input. Um, if that input can be arbitrarily large, but our code is small, then we can write a constant size piece of code that can take on any average or arbitrary arbitrarily large size input. Uh, if that input can be arbitrary arbitrarily large, but our code is small, then our code needs to loop or recurse or repeat some of these lines of code in order to just to read that output. Right? So there's another way you can arrive at this conclusion that we're going to probably need to use recursion induction. And that's part of the reason that we ask you to take a course on, on proofs on discrete math, things like that. Um, before this class. So how do we prove that my algorithm is correct? We've got to use induction. Okay. can we set up this induction? What do we need for inductive proofs? Base case, right? We need to start at a base case. We need some kind of predicate. We need some kind of statement of hypothesis of something that should be maintained. And then we need to have an inductive step, which basically says I can take a small value of this thing. I use the inductive hypothesis, and I argue it for a larger value of my well-ordered set that I'm inducting over. For this algorithm, if we are going to try to prove correctness, what I'm going to do is, what do I want to prove for this? So at the end of interviewing all of you, I want to know that my algorithm has returned a pair that match, or in a case that there wasn't a pair in my set, that it returned none, right? That would be correct. So how can I generally prove that my algorithm has returned a pair that match, or in a case that there wasn't a pair that matched? So I'm going to say, let's say after I've interviewed the first 10, let's say, let's call it K, the first K students, if there were a match in those first K students, I want to be sure that I've returned a pair, because if after I interview all of you, I've maintained that property, then I'll be sure at the end of this process, I have returned a pair if one exists. So here's my inductive. Hypothesis. If the first K students contain a match, algorithm returns a match before interviewing, say, K plus one, say student K plus one, right? So that would be my inductive hypothesis. If there's N students in this class, at the end of my thing, I am trying to interview a student N plus one, right? And then N plus one's not there. If I've maintained this, then if I replace just Ks with Ns, as we were just speaking, I'm going to be sure that I've returned a pair. So I'm going to be sure that I've returned a pair. And then I will have returned a match before interviewing the last student when I have no more students left, right? And then our algorithm returns none as it should. So this inductive hypothesis sets up a nice variable to induct on. What's the base case? Let's think about that. Base case, the easiest thing I can do, you might think two, you might think one. I could check all those possibilities. There's an even easier base case, actually, even easier than one. I'll give you a second. It's zero, right? After interviewing zero students, I haven't done any work. So certainly the first zero can't have a match. This inductive hypothesis, this is true. Just because this initial predicate is false, right? So I can say base case zero. Check. Definitely this predicate would hold for that. So now we get to the meat of this thing. Let's assume the inductive hypothesis true for K equals K prime is usually how we would write that. So we're considering K prime plus one. We have two cases. One of the nice things about induction is that it, it isolates our problem to not consider everything at once. It breaks it down into a smaller interface so that we can do less work at each step. So there's two cases. Either the first K already has, has a match, which in this case, by our inductive hypothesis, we've already returned the correct answer. The other case is it doesn't have a match. And we interview the K plus one student, the K prime plus one student. And if there is a match in the first, K prime plus one students, then it would include the student K prime plus one, because otherwise there would have been a match in the things before it. So there's, there's two cases. If K contains a match, K prime, if the first K contains a match already returned by induction else, if K prime plus one students contain the match, the algorithm checks all the possibilities, right? K prime checks against all the students essentially by brute force. It's, it's a case. Analysis. I check all the possibilities, check it. Birthdays in the record. I haven't told you how to do that yet, but, but if I'm able to do that, I'm gonna check if it's in the record, if it's in the record, then there would be a match and I can return it. Otherwise I have reestablished the inductive hypothesis for K prime plus one students. Okay. Does that make sense? Okay. So that's how we prove correctness. That's a little bit more formal than I would ask you to do in this class all the time, but it's definitely sufficient for the levels of arguments that you'd be asked to. So the bar that we're trying to set is if you communicated to someone else, taking this class, what your algorithm was, they would be able to code it up and tell the computer how to do that thing. We're going to argue that, that using, we're going to use the idea of induction through this class. And if you're unfamiliar with this line of argument, then please do review that slightly at some point, that'd be good. So correctness being able to communicate that the problem that the algorithm we stated was correct. Now we want to argue it's efficiency. Okay. So if you're familiar with the algorithm, we're going to argue that it's efficiency and what does, what does efficiency mean? Efficiency. Just means not only how fast does the algorithm run, but how fast does it compare to other possible ways of approaching this problem? How, how can we measure how fast an algorithm runs? All you think about that for a second. Well, first we could just record that a tie the time it takes for the computer to run your code, right? You can time your script, but there's a problem with just coding up an algorithm and telling the computer what to do and timing how long it takes, right? Hopefully you see some issues with that one common one common answer here is, is that it definitely would depend on the size of your dataset. And to that I say, yes, we expect that, but there's a bigger problem here. And that is, it depends on the strength of your computer. Yes. I would expect that if I had some watch calculator and I would have to put in a Ku-Kin-Ko, you could put in a Ku-Kin-Ko and that would be the strength of your computer. And then I would also have to put in about half the data. I would have to put in about half the data. I would need to have a count of the data. And then I would have to put in about half the data. I programmed it to do something that might take a lot longer to solve than if I asked BYU Idaho's research computer to solve the same problem using the same algorithm, even with the same code, right? Because its underlying operations are much faster. How it runs is much faster. So I don't want to count how long it would take on a real machine. I want to abstract the time that it takes the machine to do stuff out of the picture. What I want to say is let's assume that each kind of fundamental operation that the computer can do takes some fixed amount of time. And then let's say how many of those kinds of fixed operations does the algorithm need to perform to be able to solve this problem? So here we're not measuring time. Instead, we're counting fundamental operations. We'll get to what some of those fundamental operations are. But the idea is that we want to measure how well an algorithm performs, not how well it performs. So we want to measure how well an algorithm performs, not how well it performs, but how well it performs. So we want to measure how well an algorithm performs, not necessarily an implementation of that algorithm. Anyway, hopefully that makes sense. So what we're going to use to measure time or efficiency is something called asymptotic analysis, asymptotic notation, big O notation. You may have heard these terms. We're going to go through a formal definition of asymptotic notation in future lectures, and you'll get a lot of practice in comparing functions using asymptotic analysis. But just to give you an idea, the idea is we don't measure time. Instead, we measure operations, as I said. We expect performance, and I'm specifically saying that instead of time here, we expect performance to depend on size of our input. If we're trying to run an algorithm to find a birthday in this section, we expect that algorithm to run in a shorter amount of time than if I were to run an algorithm on the entire university. We expect it to perform differently depending on the size of the input. So we're going to use an algorithm to find a birthday in this section. We expect it to perform differently depending on the size of the input. So we expect it to perform differently depending on the size of the input. So we expect it to perform differently depending on the size of the input. And how differently is how we measure performance relative to that input. Usually, we use n as a variable for what the size of our input is. Anyway, that's not always the case, but usually. So for example, if we have an array that I give you, an n by n array that we're going to say n, but what's the size of our input? How much information do I need to convey to you to give you that information? It's n squared, right? So that's the size of our input in that context. Excuse me. If I give you a graph, it's usually the number of vertices plus the number of edges. That's how big, how much space I would need to convey to you that graph, that information. We compare how fast an algorithm is with respect to the size of the input. We'll use asymptotic notation for that. We have big O notation, which corresponds to our upper bounds. We have, we have omega, which corresponds to our lower bounds. And we have theta, which corresponds to both. Theta is called our tight bound. It's bounded from above and below by a function of this form. We have a couple common functions that can relate an algorithm's input size to its performance. Some things that we, that we see, we have, we have a linear algorithm, a linear time algorithm. That's basically saying running time of my algorithm, performance of my algorithm is, is linear. And then we have a linear time algorithm, which is basically saying that the performance of my algorithm is, is linear. And then we have a linear time algorithm, which is basically saying that the performance of my algorithm is, is linear. And then we have a linear time algorithm, which is basically saying that the performance of my algorithm is, is linear. with respect to any size of input. So linear time is a type of function. We've got some of these. We've got like a constant time, no matter how we change the input, the amount of time this is running the performance my algorithm takes, it doesn't really depend on that. We have, we have logarithmic time. We have, sometimes we have like a log linear, where we log the time of the momentum of the time of the time that we are measuring it. And if we entered in this ingenuity, we can use anstrual method to figure out how to use this opportunity. And so what we're doing here is we're trying to make this happen. So in mining we can, I could say we can use a Podium and then we could simply do some quadratic laminated, so do to, do n log n, we don't have to do chick by H, but we have a, we have viennent mode and then, and wein tenha 2, because we do the kinematics of jon mannerism with 1996 icons. Anyway, anyways, I think that's something you might want to use to slow down here if you don't see this, so here's a couple of things on origination. But also one thing to know, if you are going to plot these, zoom out in your view because because we care about big N. So so when we're looking at a logarithmic graph, for example, our logarithmic graph really kind of is comparable to our our constant graphs. Right. And both of those would be under most people. When we say linear, you draw your line. Right. Both of those would be falling under your linear, which falls under your exponential things like that. So zoom out, of course, because if you're looking at a zoomed in map of this, you would see your constant runtime and your logarithmic time would look quite a lot different than that, depending on which logarithmic graph you've plotted, of course. Anyway. So how do we measure these things? If I don't know what my fundamental operations are that my computer, would use, we need to define some kind of model of computation for what our computer is allowed to do in a constant time and in a fixed amount of time. And in general, what we use in this class is a machine called a word RAM, which we use for its theoretical brevity. Sort of a loaded term. Do you maybe do you know what RAM means? You probably do. Random access memory. It means that I can randomly access different places in memory in a constant time. That's the assumption of random access memory of RAM. Basically what our model, what our model of a computer, whatever model of computer, you have a memory associated with that, which is essentially just a string of bits. It's a bunch of ones and zeros. We have a computer like a CPU, which is really small. It can hold a small amount of information, but it can change that information. It can operate on that information. And it also has instructions to let it. So I can have a bunch of ones and zeros, or I can have to have a bunch of something in between. You can have a bunch of something in between. It's really, really small. It's really small. It's really, really small. And then when you have thisunächst loop, it's it's really small. randomly access different places in memory, bring it onto the CPU, act on it, and read it back. Hopefully that makes sense. In general, we don't have an address for every bit in memory, every zero, every one in memory. Do you know how modern computers are addressed, actually? So what a modern computer is addressed in is bytes, collections of eight bits. So there's an address I have for every eight bits in memory, consecutive eight bits in memory. And so if I want to pull something into the CPU, I give it an address. It'll take some chunk and bring it into the CPU, operate on it, and spit it back. And how big is that chunk? It's some sequence of some fixed number of bits, which we call a word. And a word is how big of a chunk that the CPU can take in from memory at a time and operate on. In your computers, how big is that word size? It's probably 64 bits. That's how much I can operate on in time. When our parents were growing up, say, their word size was probably 32 bits. And that is actually a problem. That was a problem for their computer. Because in order for them to be able to read to address in memory, they would need to be able to store that address in their CPU in a word. But if they have 32 bits, how many different addresses can they address? They would have a limitation on memory. So if they have 32 bits, how many different addresses can they address? They can address, right? So how many could they address with 32 bits? It would be 2 to 32, right? That makes sense. So if you do that calculation now, how big of a hard disk can they have access? It's about 4 gigabytes. So in their day, the hard drives were limited to being partitioned. Even if they had a bigger than 4 gigabyte hard drive, they had to partition it into 4 gigabyte chunks, which the computer could then read onto. Very limiting. Very, very restrictive. With 64 bits, what's our limitation on memory that we can address by addressable? Turns out it's something like 20 exabytes or something, to put this in context. All data that Google stores on their servers, all the drivers in the world, it's about 10, I think, last I read. So we're not going to run into this limitation very soon. So what do we have? We have a CPU. It can address memory. What are the options that I can do in the CPU? Generally, I have binary options. I can do binary options. I can do binary options. I can do binary options. I can compare to words in memory, and I can either do integer arithmetic, logical operations, bitwise operations, but we're not going to use those much in this class. And I can write and write from an address in memory, a word in constant time. Those are the operations that I have available to me on most CPUs. So some CPUs give you a little bit more power, but this is generally what we analyze algorithms with respect to. Anyway, an operation produces a third one. Okay, so my CPU is only built to operate on a constant amount of time of information, generally two words in memory, right? An operation would produce a third one, and I spit it out. It takes a constant amount of time to operate on a constant amount of memory. So if you want to operate on a linear amount of memory and things, how long would that take? If I want to just read everything in that, I would have to do that. So I would have to do that. It's going to take me linear time because I have to read every part of that thing. So what we're going to do for the first half of this class is talk about data structures. Probably not the full first half, but for the first part of this class, we're going to talk about data structures. And it's going to be concerned about not operating on constant amount of data at a time like our CPU is doing, but instead what we're going to do is operate on, store a large amount of data and support different operations on that data. So if I had a record that I wanted to maintain to store some birthdays, like we were talking about, like we had before, I might use something like a static array, which you guys maybe aren't familiar with if you've been working in Python and Python's your only programming language. Python has a lot of really interesting data structures, like a list and a set and a dictionary and all of these kinds of things that are not actually in this model. There's a lot of code between you and the computer. So it's not always clear how much time that interface is taking. So what we're going to do is talk about ways of storing a non-constant amount of information to make operations on that information faster. In closing here, I just want to give you a quick overview of this class. So to solve an algorithm problem in this class, we essentially have two different strategies. We can either reduce it, we can reduce to using the solution to a problem we know how to solve, or we can design our own algorithm. In order toʻll this problem out to this algorithm, which is going to be recursive in nature, we're going to either put stuff in the data structure and solve a sorting problem or search in a graph. How To istoil a data with Data package to design a recursive algorithm, we have various design paradigms, I'll post some of those in the iLearn, so you can take a look at those. Which one I'll show you soupontop. We're going to spend the first lectures on data structures and sorting and then in this class, we're going to talk about shortest paths, algorithms, graphs, things like that. So we let our time pass, even the second. Which one I just showed you in the first lecture are just about الفныхz<|gl|> which actually... this is more simple. I know seat announcements, so that sometimes it gets better. Things like space donné. that and then well we'll get on to dynamic program um we'll of course mix coding in there theory in there um but yeah that's uh that's the end of our of our first lecture thanks for listening and um tune in to the next one