Okay, so we've had an introduction to this course and a little review of data structures and dynamic arrays. Let's pick up where we left off last time. We're going to... Okay. Okay, we're going to pick up where we left off in our last lecture. Continue on with a similar theme that we're going to see throughout our algorithms class.

Let's start with just some key terms here. In the first lecture, we introduced two big keywords that are closely related, but they are not precisely the same. There's an object called an interface, which is just a program specification. It's telling us that there's a collection of operations that we want to implement. For example, a set, as we're going to see today, is just a big pile of things. Behind the scenes, how I choose to implement it can affect the runtime and how efficient my set is.

The actual way that I interact with it is the same, whether I use an unsorted array, a sorted array, what you have... On the other hand, what happens behind the scenes is something called data structure, which is a way to actually, in some sense, implement an interface. This is an object that on my computer is actually sorting the information and implementing the set of operations that I have laid out in my interface. This distinction, I think, is a critical theme in this course, because, for instance, in the first couple of weeks, we're going to talk about many different ways to implement a set. I'm going to see that there's a bunch of trade-offs. Some of them are really fast for certain operations and slow for others.

Essentially, we have two different decisions to make when we choose an algorithm. One is making sure that the interface is correct for the problem that we're concerned with, of course. The other is choosing an appropriate data structure whose efficiency and memory usage, and so on, aligns with the priorities that we have for the application we have in mind. Hopefully, this high-level theme makes sense here. Really, I think this is the main message to get out of this course for the first couple of weeks, even though we're looking at big O's and Theta's here, and asymptotic notation and runtimes. It's easy to get lost in the forest through the trees, if that's what we say.

In any event, today in our lecture, we're concerned with one particular interface, which is called a set. A set is exactly what it sounds like. It's a big pile of things. A set interface is like an object that you can just keep adding things to it, and then querying inside of my set. For example, maybe we have a set which represents all of the students in our classroom today. All of you guys are associated with a student ID.

I believe a BYUI is a number. We can sort all of you guys. That might be the key associated to every object in this room. When I'm searching for students, maybe I enter in the student number, and then I want to ask my set, does this student exist in the set of numbers that are in CSC 381? If it does, then I can pull that student back. Then associated with that object is a bunch of other information that I'm not using to search.

For instance, your name, your Social Security number, maybe your credit card number, all of the stuff that I need to have a more interesting profession. In any event, let's fill in the details of our set interface a little bit more. Our set is a container. It contains all the students in this classroom, and in some virtual sets at least. To build up our set, of course, we need an operation that takes some iterable object, A, and builds a set out of it. In other words, I have all the students in this classroom represented, maybe in some other fashion, and I have to insert them all into my set.

I can also ask my set for how much stuff is in it as well. Then, of course, there are a lot of different ways that we can interact with our set. For instance, we could say, is this student taking CSC 381 and set language, one way to understand that is to say that the key, each person in this classroom is associated with a key, does that key exist in my set? In which case, I'll call this a find function, which will give me back the item with the key K, or maybe null or something if it doesn't exist. I can. There's our find here.

I can delete an object from my set, or I can insert it. Notice that these are dynamic operations, meaning they are actually editing what's inside of my set. Then, finally, there are kinds of operations that I might want to do to interact with my set beyond this is the thing inside of it. For instance, for the student ID example, finding the minimum ID number in a class isn't terribly exciting, but maybe I'm trying to find the student who's been at BYUI to hold the longest. I actually have no idea if BYUI student IDs are assigned linearly or not. In any event, I can find the smallest key, I can find the largest key, and so on in my set.

These are all reasonable operations to query, where my object is just a thing that stores a lot of different entities inside of it. This description here, I've labeled this as set interface. This is not a set data structure, and a way to remember that is I haven't told you how I've actually implemented this. I haven't told you that I'm going behind the scenes, that I have an array of information to look inside. That's how we're going to implement to find min or max was a loop. All I'm telling you is that a set is a thing that implements these operations.

Behind the scene, my computer does what it does. It might sound abstract, but it's more or less what you guys do when you write code in Python. I'm pretty sure what we're calling a set, at least in Python, is a dictionary. I mostly write RStudio code, but I enjoy Python as well. Essentially, one of the beautiful things about coding in these high-level programming languages is that they take care of usually these more ugly details. What you're left with is just the high-level interfacing with this object that you need at the end of the day.

Of course, in today's lecture, we've set out on our goal, which is to fill in, if I wanted to write code for a set, how could I do it? Of course, our goal is to give different data structures that implement these. Then understand them in terms of their efficiency, data storage, correctness, all that good stuff. Now, let's talk about how to actually implement this thing. Thankfully, we're already equipped with at least a very simple way that we can implement a set based on what you've already seen in previous programming classes or even just in these last couple of lectures, which is one way to understand a set or to implement it rather would be to just store a giant array of objects that are in my set. I suppose in continuing on with the theme of the last two lectures, this is not a space of memory, but rather a metaphorical array, a theoretical array here.

It doesn't really matter though. One way to store my set would just to store it here, we see a bunch of Xs in no particular order. A big piece of memory, every piece of memory is associated with a different object in my set. Obviously, this is quite easy to build. I just make a big array, dump everything in there. My question for you is, is this particularly efficient or a useful way to implement a set?

Think about that for a second. Okay, for instance, let's say that I have a set of all the students in this classroom again. There's some number of you guys. Actually asymptotically efficiency maybe matters a little bit, right? I want to query, does the student exist in my class? Is Mlinepec registered to CSE 381?

The answer is no, right? Teaching, yes, taking, no. But in any event, how do I implement it if my set is unordered? Let's think about that. One idea, just to iterate from the beginning of the array and say, is this person Mline? Is this person Mline?

No, is this person Mline? No, and so on, if found return. The worst case, how long would that algorithm take? Well, in the worst case of bad luck, I'm at the end of the list, right? In this case, what's that going to mean? That means we have to walk along our entire array before we find me, before we see Mlinepec.

That algorithm would take order and time, not particularly efficient as we've seen. What if I sort the set and then apply a binary search? I know I'm going to have to search my array many, many times for different people, like in our first solution of iterating from the beginning. Then it probably would make sense to do a little bit of work ahead of time, like sorting the list. And then my query is much more efficient. But this is all just to say that an unordered list is a perfectly reasonable way to implement this set interface.

And then searching that array will take linear time every time I search. And of course, if you go down your list of all the different operations you might want to do on a set, you'll see that they would all take linear time. So for instance, how, if we're looking back here, how do I build myself? Well, I reserve end slots in memory. And at least according to our model of computation in this class, that takes order and time. Then I'm going to copy everything into that set.

Similarly, if I want to insert or delete, what do I have to do? Well, I have to reserve memory, stick something inside of there. And in worst case, we saw this amortize argument before. But if your set is allowed to grow dynamically, that's when we see that amortize argument. Finally, if I wanted to find the minimum student ID in my classroom, the only algorithm I have is if my list of students isn't sorted is to what? It's to just iterate over every single student in this class.

Right? And if the guy that we're looking, if the guy or girl that we're looking for has a smaller ID than the one I found, replace it. So basically everything you can do in a set you can implement. And I think all of you guys are more than qualified to implement is an unordered array. It's just going to be slow. So in some sense, we're done.

Right? We've now implemented the interface. Life is good. And of course, this is the difference between existence and actually caring about the details inside of this thing. We've shown that one can implement a set, but it's not a terribly efficient way to do it by just storing a big, hot mess, disorganized list of numbers without any order. So instead of that, let's switch things up and talk about a different data structure that I mentioned the second go, which is to store our set not just as a disorganized array in any arbitrary order, but rather keep the items in our set organized by key.

So in other words, if I have this array of all the students in our classroom, the very first element in my array is going to be the student with the smallest ID number. The second is the second smallest number all the way to the end of the array, which is the student with the biggest ID number. Now, does that mean I want to do arithmetic on student ID numbers? No, no, absolutely not. But it's just a way to impose order on that list so that I can search it very quickly. Here's this so we can see this as well.

Okay, so if I want to fill in the set interface and I have somehow a sorted array of students, so again, they're organized by student ID number, then my runtime starts to get a little bit more interesting. Right, so now insertion, deletion, they take the same amount of time, but let's say that I want to find the student ID with the minimum number. Let's find this min function here, let's find min. Well, how could I do it on a sorted array? Keyword is sorted here. What is the minimum element, where I should say is the minimum element of an array?

If I want the minimum element of an array and the array is in sorted order, we know that's the first thing. So that's order one time to answer that kind of question. And similarly, if I want the thing with the biggest ID number, I look all the way to the end. I think you all have already learned about binary search and probably hopefully have even implemented it at some point. So what do we know? If my array is sorted, how long does it take for me to search for any given element?

We know this. Log in time, right? Because I can cut my array in half. If my key is bigger or smaller, then I look on the left or the right. And so this is much more efficient. It's a much more efficient way of searching the set.

Okay, I don't know if you noticed. I've swept one thing under the rug here, which is how do I actually get a sorted array to begin with? And what we're going to see in today's lecture is that takes more time than building if I just have a disorganized list. Building a disorganized list is an easy thing to do. But actually sorting a list of numbers does require a little bit more work. And so this is a great example where there's at least a tiny amount of trade-off.

Building my sorted array to represent my set is going to take a little bit more computation. We're going to see that it's end log in time. But then once I've done that step, now a lot of these other operations that we're seeing that I typically care about in a set like searching for a given key are going to become a lot faster using binary search. So this is our motivator here. And now we've seen the setup interface and two potential data structures. And our goal for the day is going to be to fill in the details of that second one.

And since you've already seen binary search, you've probably also already seen sorting. So we're going to focus on how we can take a disorganized list of objects and put it into a sorted order so that we can search for things later. OK, hopefully you either understand or I've justified why you might want to sort things. And indeed, there are a couple of vocabulary words that are worth noting here. So one, remember that your sorting algorithm is pretty straightforward in terms of how you specify it. In sorting, your input is an array of n numbers here.

I suppose we should think of them like keys and your output is going to be sorted array. Let's say we have we have a and b here. So there are a lot of variations on the basic sorting problem and the different algorithms that are out there, two vocabulary words that we're going to highlight really fast here. One is if your sort is destructive. What that means is rather than reserving some new memory for my sorted array B and then putting a sorted version of a into B, a destructive algorithm is one that just overwrites a with a sorted version of a. In addition to destructive sorts, some sorts are in place, meaning that they not only are they destructive, but they also don't use extra memory in the process of sorting.

Really, you could imagine a sorting algorithm that has to reserve a bunch of scratch space to do its work and then put it back into a, for instance, the, you know, the world's like slowest or like dumbest, I guess, destructive sort might be to call your non destructive and then copy it back into a, but that would require order in space to do. So if my algorithm additionally has that has the property that it doesn't reserve any extra space, at least up to a constant, then we call that in place. OK, so those are those are basic vocabulary words here. And there are ways to understand the differences between sorting algorithms. So let's talk about the world's simplest sorting algorithm. We're going to call it we're going to call it permutation sort.

I think it's very easy to prove correctness for this particular technique. And what we can do and and what can we do in permutation sort? Well, I know that if I have an input that's a list of numbers, there exists some permutation of that list of numbers that is sorted by definition because a sort is a permutation of your original list. Then what's a very, very, you know, let's think about this. So while list every. What am I trying to ask?

What makes this very simple sorting algorithm? If we list every possible permutation and then just double check. That it's the right order. There's two key pieces in this particular technique if we want to analyze it, right? One is that we have to enumerate the permutations. And if we have a list of n numbers, how many different permutations of n numbers are there?

It's shown here, but n factorial, of course. So just by virtue of calling this permutations function, I know that I incur at least n factorial time. It might be worse. It might be that actually listing permutations takes a lot of time for some reason, like every permutation itself takes order n time. But at the very least, each one of these things looks like n factorial. And then, secondarily, while we've got to check if that particular permutation is sorted and how do we do that?

Very easy to check if the list of sorted I'm going to do. Do I four equals one equals one to to n minus one? And then check is b i less than or equal to b i plus one. So if I get all the way to the end for this loop and this is true everywhere, then my list is sorted. Life is good. All right, then how long does this algorithm take?

Well, staring staring us right in the face here, because we have an algorithm that's looping from one to n minus one. So this step occurs in order n time because theta theta of n time, because it's it's has to go all the way to the end. Right. So at the end of the day, our algorithm takes at least n factorial times n time. It's a great example of something that's even worse than n factorial, which somehow in my head is like the worst possible algorithm. So do we think Python implements permutation sort?

Hopefully not. But if we go back to our table, or I guess I'm coming here, if we go back to our table for the set interface, in some sense, if we implemented it using our goofy algorithm here, then the lower left entry in our table would be n factorial times n, which wouldn't be so hot. But notice that actually all the rest of our operations are now quite efficient. I can use binary search. I just obtained the algorithm that rather, I guess I obtained the sorted array in a funny fashion. So let's fill in some more interesting algorithms.

How many of us have seen selection sort? A selection sort is exactly what it sounds like. It's maybe one that you've seen before. Let's say we have a list of numbers here. We've got eight, two, four, nine, three. And I want to sort this list of numbers.

Use an algorithm for how to do it, which is we can find the biggest number in this whole list and stick it at the end. So in this case, what's the biggest number in this list? It's nine, right? Good. So I'm going to take the nine. I find it, I swap it out with the three because the three is at the end.

And now, now what's my inductive hypothesis? Well, in some cases, that everything to to the right of this line here, this line here, is in a sorted order. And in this case, because there's only there's only one thing, right? That's so. So what are we going to do now? I'm going to look to the left of the line, find the next biggest thing, which here is eight.

Swap it with the three that was in this spot, put it at the end and so on. So hopefully you guys could have could have finished that off. And so essentially from from a high level, what what does selection sort do? Well, it just kept choosing the element, which was biggest and swapping it into the back and then iterating in CSC 381. We're going to write selection sort in a way that you might not be familiar with. In some sense, it's not so hard to implement with two for loops.

I think you guys could all do this at home. In fact, you may have already. We're going to take we're going to take the selection sort algorithm and we're going to divide it into two chunks. One of them is to find the biggest thing in the first K elements of my array. I guess we should have used K. That means key the first I elements in in my array.

And the next is to swap it into place and then sort everything to the left. That's the two pieces here. So so let's write that down. What did I do in some sense in step one here? I found the the biggest with index less than or equal to I. So we start at the end of the list and then and then moved backwards.

Whoops. And then step two is to swap that into place. And notice when I say swap, for instance, when I put in the eight, we have to do something with with that three. So I just put the eight where so I just put it where the eight used to be. And then finally, well, are we done? No, I just put the biggest thing at the end of my array.

So now I have to sort from index I from index one, excuse me, to I minus one, because now I know that the last guy is in its sorted order. Right. So so we sort from from one to two I minus one. So let's implement this helper function here. This is something that we're going to call prefix prefix max. And this is going to help me find the biggest element of my array between index zero and index I inclusive.

Yes, I inclusive, I believe. Here's an interesting observation, a really deep one, which is that the biggest element from from zero to I, there's there's two cases, right? Either it's at index I, meaning I have the first 10 elements of my right. Either it is element number 10 or what's the other case? It isn't right. Yeah.

So in other words, it has index less than I. Either the biggest thing is is at this index or it's not, which in this case, it has to be to the left. Hopefully that makes sense. So so this gives us a really simple algorithm for for finding the biggest element in the array between index zero and index I, which is what I've shown you on the screen here. OK, so essentially what? What did we implement?

Well, we've found the biggest element between zero and index I minus one. So let's say I have an array. I forget what our numbers are. Here we go. 8, 2, 8, 2, 4, 9, 3. Let's let's do let's do a different one. Let's do 8, 5, 8, 3, 5, 7, 9.

And so let's do a pointer. Let's give it here to 9. This is this is I. So the very first thing I do is I compute the biggest number all the way to the left of this stuff in this case that is 8. Right. Now I look at the very last element of my array, which is 9.

And then what do I return? Well, I want the biggest one between zero and index I. So in this case, return the nine. Hopefully that makes sense. So we want to prove that our algorithm works. What do we have to do?

We have to show that when we call this function, it gives me the max of my array between index zero and index I for all I. So maybe let's maybe do do an inductive proof a little bit carefully. And then the rest we can be a little sloppier with. So the base case is is I equals zero. In this case, there's only one element in my array. So it's pretty clear that's the max.

Now we have to do our inductive step, which means if I call prefix max with I minus one, I really do get the max of my array between zero and index I minus one. And then really, I can just look at my very deep statement that we made, which is that either my object is at the end of the array or it's not. And this is precisely what we need to justify the inductive step. Essentially, two cases, either my my biggest element of the array is the last one or it's not. We already, by our inductive hypothesis, have argued that our code can find the biggest element between index zero and index I minus one. So as long as we take the max of that and the very last guy, the very last guy, we're in good shape.

So this this here is our very informal proof proof of correct correctness. So now we have to justify runtime for this algorithm. And that's actually not 100 percent obvious from the way that I've written it here. There's there's no for loop, but but what do I do? Well, in some sense, if my runtime is a function S well for for one thing, if my array has one element in it, well, my runtime might be might be seven, it might be 23, but at the end of the day, it only does one thing. It just returns I right.

So so in other words, we've got theta theta of one here. And I'm sorry, I'm walking us through through this. OK, so so we've got theta of one. This isn't terribly insightful. What else do we know? Well, when I call my function, I call it recursively on one smaller index.

And then I do a constant amount of work. So I know that that S of n, I know that S of n is equal to S of n minus one plus theta of one. I do a little bit of extra computation on that. Can you guess what our total runtime is going to be? It's going to be order order of n. OK, so let's say that we hypothesize that this takes n time.

You can see that because of step because at this step where we call n minus one, we call it minus two and so forth. All the way down to one. And if we want to prove this, one of the ways that we I think in theory, you guys have learned in the past as a technique called substitution. What we do is we're going to look at this relationship. We're going to hypothesize that we think S of n maybe looks something like C of n for a constant here. And and that it doesn't depend on on n.

Then all we have to do is double check that the relationship is constant with our inductive hypothesis or rather just as a recursive function. And if it is, then we're in good shape. So in this case, well, what do we know? We've guessed that that T of n is theta of n. In particular, if I plug this into the recursive relationship here on the left hand side, I'm going to get C of n C, C n. On the right hand side, I'm going to get C n minus one plus plus theta one.

So we just have to make sure that this is an OK equals sign there that we're placing in. So what can I do? I can I can subtract C n from both sides, maybe put that one on the other side. Then we get C equals C equals big I have one. C is, of course, constant here. So we're in good shape.

So if we want to implement the selection sort algorithm, what do we do? Well, we're going to think of I as the index. We had that that line that I was showing you before. There we go. Oh, I should have been on this side. I guess this is what I was walking you guys through.

So we have we have this I have this I index here. Everything beyond I is already sorted. So in selection sort, the first thing I'm going to do is find the max element between zero and I, and then I'm going to swap it into place. So this is just a code version of the technique we've already talked about. Hopefully this is making sense. I also post these slides so you can refer back to them.

So you find the biggest element between zero and index I, that's what we're going to call called J. And I swap that with with the one in index I. That's our that's our second step. And then our third step is I still have to sort everything to the left of index I. And that's the recursive call. So if I want to justify the runtime of this particular technique, let's call that T for time.

OK, what do I do? Well, for one, I call selection sort with index I minus one. So that incurs time that looks like this here. But I also call that prefix max function and how much time does that take? That takes order n time. Right.

So remember, there's a nice relationship, which you maybe learned in some kind of combinatorics class, which is that one plus two plus dot all the way to n. Looks like n squared. Right. So based on that and taking a look at this recursive thing, which is essentially doing exactly that, n plus n minus one plus n minus two and so on. I might hypothesize that this thing is really order n squared. So if I'm going to do that, then again, if I want to use the same technique for proof, I have to plug this relationship in and then double check that it's consistent.

So maybe I hypothesize that T of n equals C n squared, in which case we'll plug it in as shown here. I have C n squared equals and should technically have a question mark over it C n minus one squared plus big O or even theta n here. So if I expand the square, notice I'm going to get C times n squared plus a bunch of linear stuff. This is really C n squared. I should be careful with that minus we should be careful with that minus two C n plus C theta of n. Notice that there's a C n squared on both sides of our equation.

They can go away. And what we're left with is a nice consistent formula that theta of n equals two C n minus two C and indeed this is an order of n expression. Order in the universe, life is good. This is the substitution method. So what have we done? We've derived such a sort.

We've checked that it runs in n squared time and by this nice inductive strategy, we know that it's correct, life is good. Unfortunately, don't know if you are catching this right now. There is a little more work to do in our slides earlier. I promised you guys that sorting really takes n log n of time and this right now is an order n squared algorithm, so we're not done with this quite yet. We'll possibly see this in a weekly problem. And instead, let's jump on to merge sort.

Really, really useful. There's a couple other sorting algorithms we can look at, insertion sort, things like that. But I do like merge sort. Hopefully you've seen it before. Let's say we have a list. So we've got seven, seven, one, five, six, two, four, nine, three.

This is not in sorted order, but we can make our very deep observation, which is that every number by itself is in sorted order. And just as long as we think of those as an array of length one, right? Think about that for a sec. Now, now what can we do? I've shown you some steps here, so maybe maybe that helps you see where we're going. But I could take every pair of numbers, draw a little box.

Now they're not in sorted order anymore inside the boxes. So I'm just going to sort inside every box, right? In this case, not too exciting because it's just pairs. Now they're in sorted order because, well, because they are right. Let's keep doubling the size of our boxes. Let's say I have box of length four.

What do I know about the left and right hands of those lines there? On two sides of the lines, the array is in sorted order. There's a one and a seven. Those are in sorted order five and six. That's because in the previous step, I sorted every pair, right? So when I merge these those two sides together, I have an additional piece of useful information, namely that on the two sides of the line, they're already in sorted order.

And that's going to be our basic inductive step here. So in this case, I merge those two sides, I get one, five, six, seven, and two, three, four, nine. Then finally, I put these two things together. I have to sort these two. I have to merge these two sorted lists, but they're in sorted order. So that's going to be the basic idea of merge sort.

Now I'm going to take two sorted lists and I'm going to make a new sorted list, which is twice as long. So that's our basic intuition. Indeed, here's our here's our sorted list. It's stressing me out that there's no eight here. So bad as me. OK, so in in merge sort, we're going to present it in a backward way from previous one, where I'm going to give you the high level algorithm.

And then actually the headache is that merging step. Which we'll have slightly less time for and I apologize for that. But what does the merge sort do? Well, it computes an index C. It computes. Let's see.

Do I have. OK. OK, let's see. Here we go. OK, it computes an index C, which is in the middle of the array. And it's going to make a recursive call, which is to sort to the left, which is everything between index A and index C, and then sort everything on the right, which is everything from index C to index B.

Now, I know this is confusing because usually letters appear in order. But C, if you think about that standing for center, then this will make sense. So that's what this is implementing here. There's two recursive calls sort from A to C and then sort from C to B. And then we have to call merge. So in our implementation of merge, we can do this in a recursive fashion.

Here's a basic idea. So we use. Here we go. OK, I'm trying to show this in a way that hopefully makes sense. If what I'm about to explain does not make sense. This is called the two finger algorithm.

You can just do a Google search on this. But. OK, we can do some recursive fashion. Here's the basic idea here. So I'm going to think of my upper finger as I lower finger as J. So I've shown you here I and J of our two sorted lists.

We've got one, three, five, seven, second sorted lists, two, two, four, six, eight. And then we have one pointer at I, one pointer down at J. And our goal is to construct an array with a bunch of elements in it. And the way we're going to do that is I'm going to use the same kind of recursive argument that I can either have the biggest element of my array be the last element of the first guy or be the last element of the second one. So there's our recursive call. And in addition to that, for convenience, we'll have a third index, which is B, which is pointing to this thing inside my my sorted array that I'm currently processing, right?

It's going to start at A and go to B. So in this case, what should I put into B for my two arrays? I have one, three, five, seven, two, four, six, eight. What do we put in there? Eight, right? Great.

So now what we're going to do, we're going to call the merge function, but I'm going to decrement B here. So so we put eight in, we're going to decrement B because now we're happy with that last element. And in addition to that, I'm going to decrement J because I just used used my eight. So we're moving our two function or two fingers here. And so that that's our recursive call here. It's saying if J is less than or equal to zero, in other words, I have an element to use in one of the lists of the other.

And maybe the left one is bigger than the right one. That's our first case. That does not apply in this example here. Well, then I should make the last element from the first list and then recurse with one fewer element I. And similarly, the reverse case for J, right? So if we do our runtime, what is the merge function going to do?

Well, in some sense, there's two branches. There's an if statement with two pieces. Let me get back to here. There's an if statement with two pieces, but both of those pieces call merge with one fewer pieces in it. So in some sense, we have we have S of N equals S of N minus one plus theta of one, which we already know from our previous proof means that S of N is equal to theta of N. So in other words, it takes linear time to merge.

It makes sense intuitively because essentially you're touching every one of these things once with your two fingers. And so now probably hardest part of lecture is driving the runtime for the actual merge source algorithm. What does that look like? Well, this one's a little bit trickier. We're going to call the. Here we go.

We're going to call. We're going to call the merge store algorithm twice. Each time is on a list that's half the size, right? Right now, we're going to assume that our list is always a power of two in its length. Otherwise, this analysis would be would be a bit more of a headache. So first of all, how long does it take to sort an array of length one?

Not a hard question. It's just one, right? There's nothing to do. An array of length one has has one element and it's and it's sorted. It's also the biggest element and the smallest element in that singular array. So what does our algorithm do?

It makes two recursive calls on lists that are half of the length. And then it calls that merge function. And we know that the merge function takes theta of n time. I hopefully you're still with me. So one thing we might do, we think we think that this thing is order n log n because it makes two recursive calls and then puts them together. Let's double check that that's true using a quick substitution method.

In particular, on the left side here, maybe we have C n log n. Now I have to see. Well, I have to put n over to log n over to plus theta of n. And I want to double check that this expression is consistent. So remember, if we use our favorite identities from from high school that you probably have forgotten, remember that that log of two things divided by each other is the difference of logs. So so this is really two.

OK, two divided by two is one. So this is C times n times log n minus log of two plus theta n. Notice that there's a C log C and log n on the right side. There's a C and log n on the left side. So those two things can go away. And what are we left with?

We're left with theta of n equals C and log of two. C and and log of two are both constants. So we have a theta event on the left hand side. Order order in the universe. We've derived our runtime. So that's that's it for today.

See you next time.