Okay, hello. Okay, today we're not doing algorithms. We're actually new data structures. Today we're going to talk about sequences for entire sets, linked list, dynamic arrays, fairly simple data structures today. This is the beginning of several data structures we're going to be talking about in the next few lectures. Before we start, I am going to share my screen. Okay, that's working. Okay, so let's, okay, we're going to talk about interface versus data structure. And for interface, some of you guys might call this API if you're programming or maybe ADT versus a data structure. These are useful distinctions. The idea is that the interface says what you want to do. A data structure says, says how you do it. You, you might call this a specification. And in the context of data structures, we're trying to store some data. So the interface will specify what data you can store, whereas the data structure is going to give you an actual representation and tell you how to store it. That's, that's pretty boring, just, just storing data is really easy. You can just throw it in a file or something. What makes it interesting is having operations on that data in the interface you specify what the operations do, what operations are supported and in some sense what they mean. And the data structure actually gives you algorithms. This is where the algorithms come in for how to support those operations. And this class we're going to focus on two main interface interfaces and various special cases of them. The idea is to separate what you want to do versus how to do it, because you can think of this as the, as the problem statement. Last class, we talked about problems and to find what a problem was versus algorithmic solutions to the problem. And this is the analog analogous notion for data structures where we want to maintain some data according to various operations. The same problem can be solved by many different data structures and we're going to see that. And different data structures are going to have different advantages. They might support some operations faster than others. And depending on what you actually use those data structures for you, you can then choose the right data structure. But you can maintain the same interface. We're going to think about two data structures. One is called a set and one is called a sequence. We're going to talk about about these two things highly loaded terms set means something to a mathematician. It means something else to a Python program or similarly sequence similarly. Well, I guess there's not really a Python sequence data type built in per se. But the idea is we want to store and things the things will be fairly arbitrary think of them as integers or strings. And on one hand we care about their values and maybe we want to maintain them in a sorted order and be able to search for a given value which will call a key here. And on the other hand, we care about representing a particular sequence that we care about maybe we want to represent the numbers. 5297 in that order and store that as shown here in Python you can store that in a list for example, and it will keep track of that order. And this is the first, you know, this is the first item this is the second item the last item. Today we're going to be focusing on this sequence data structure, although at the end, I will mention interface for sets. We're actually going to be solving sequences today. And in the next several lectures will be bouncing back and forth between these they are closely related they're pretty abstract at the moment right now. But we were going to have two main data structures tools or approaches here one is arrays. And one is pointers pointer based or linked data structures you may have seen these. They're used a lot in programming of course we're going to see both of these today I'll come back to this, this sort of and highlight this moment. Let's jump into sequence interface. I have conveniently here for you. There's a few different levels of sequences that we might care about I'm going to start here with static sequence interface. This is where the number of items doesn't change, though the actual items might. Here we have an items. I'm going to label them. We've got them. We've got items through X and minus one as in Python. So the number of items is in here and the operations I want to support our, our build length iteration, get and set. What are these do maybe maybe you've seen some of these build is how we get started to build a data structure in this interface you call build of X exactly how you specify x isn't too important but the idea is, I give you some items and some order in Python. I'm going to want to know how long it's been iterable. I, I'm going to want to also know its length, and I want to make a new data structure of size and a new static sequence of size and that has those items in that order. That's how you build one of these. Somehow, because somehow we have to specify it and to this data structure because and is not going to be allowed to change so we do have to specify and in this data structure. We do a length method methods are object oriented. They're an object oriented way of thinking of operations that your interface supports. Length will just return this fixed value and it or seek here inter sequence. This is the sense in which we want to maintain the order I want to be able to output x not through x and minus one in the sequence order in that specified order that they were built in or that it was changed to this is going to iterate through all the items. So it's going to take at least linear time to output that just keep that in mind. The interesting thing is we can dynamically access anywhere in the middle of the sequence we can get the item X of I given the value of I and we can change X of I to a new given item. So that's that's called get at and set out here pretty straightforward. This should remind you very closely of something. A data structure. So this, this is an interface. This is something I might want to solve. But what's the obvious data structure that solves this problem. If you're a Python user, maybe you're thinking a list and Python is called a list. I prefer to call it an array. I don't know I, I teach their own here. We were going to use list here. List could mean many things, but the solution to this interface problem, the natural solution here. The natural solution here is what I'll call a static array. We briefly mentioned these in the first lecture, introduced them a little bit. It's a little tricky because there are no static arrays in Python to my knowledge. There's only dynamic arrays, which is something we'll get to. But what I want to talk about is what is a static array. This relates to our notion of our computational model, our model of computational and RAM, which we talked about last time. The idea in word RAM is that your memory is an array of W bit words. It's a bit circular. I'm going to define an array in terms of the word RAM, which is defined in terms of arrays here. But hopefully you get the idea. We have a big memory which goes off to infinity. Maybe it's divided into words. Each word here is W bits long. You can access this array randomly, random access memory. I can give you the number 5 and get 0 through, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The fifth word is of this RAM. If we're looking at 0 through 5, of course, this is how actual memories work. You can access any of them equally and quickly. So that's the memory. What we want to do is when we say an array, we want this to be a consecutive chunk of memory. So let's say I have an array of size 4 and I've just called it out here in these blue sections of our array here. I think that's 4. And we've got, so the array starts here on this side, ends over here, of course. It's of size 4. It's consecutive, which means if I want to access the array at position at index i, then this is the same thing as accessing my memory at position wherever the array starts, which we'll call the address of the array. In Python, this is the ID of the array plus i. So this is just simple offset arithmetic. If I want to know the zeroth item of the array, it's right here where it starts. The first one is after that. The second item is after that. So as long as I store my array consecutively in memory, I can access the array in a constant time. Okay, I can, let's see. I can do get at and set at as quickly as I can randomly access the memory and get value or set value, which we are assuming is a constant time. My array access then would be a constant time. This is what allows a static array to actually solve this problem in constant time per get at and set at. This may seem simple, but we're really going to need this model and really rely on this model increasingly as we get to more interesting data structures. This is the first time we're actually meeting it. Length is also a constant time. We're just going to store that number and long since address builders are going to take linear time iteration will take linear time pretty straightforward. When defining build one thing when defining build, we will need to introduce a little bit more of our model of computation, which is how do you create an array in the beginning. You know, I claim here that we could do in linear time, but that's just part of the model. This is called the memory allocation model. There are a few possible choices here, but the cleanest one is to just assume that you can allocate an array of size n in in theta of n time. So it takes linear time to make an array of size and you can imagine this time being constant. It doesn't really matter, but it does, it does take work. And in particular, if you just allocate some chunk of memory, you have no idea whether it's initialized. So initializing that array of zeros will cost linear time. It won't really matter constant versus linear, but a nice side effect of this model is that space. If you're just allocating arrays, the amount of space you use that most is the amount of time you use or or I guess big O big O of that. So that's a nice feature. It's, it's kind of a weird image. If you try to imagine it's unrealistic to imagine you can allocate an array that's infinite size and then just a few items out of it. That won't give you a good data structure. So we'll assume it costs to allocate memory. We so so now we've solved the sequence problem. Very simple, kind of boring. These are, these are optimal running times. So to make it interesting. Let's talk about about, oh, actually, before we move on, there's, there's one thing I want to talk about in the word Ram, a side effect of this assumption that array access should take constant time and that accessing these positions in my memory should take constant time. We need to assume W is at least log n or so right give or take W remember is is that machine word size. So this is the statement that says the word size has to grow within here. It might be faster than login, but has to grow at least as fast as login. And why, why do we say that? Think about that for a second. If I, if I have n things that I'm dealing with here and being the problem size. Maybe it's an array that we're trying to store whatever it is. If I'm having to deal with n things in my memory at the very least, I need to be able to address them. I should be able to say give me the ice one and represent that number I in a word. Otherwise, because the machine is designed to only work with W bit words in constant time, they'll want to be able to access the ice word. So I need a word size that's at least login just to address that and n things in my input. So this is a totally reasonable assumption. It may seem weird because you think of a real machine as having constant size, but a real machine has constant size RAM also. Anyway, so if you want a, if you want it to process a lot, if you want your, your machine to process a larger input, you would have to to buy more RAM. So eventually when our ends get really, really big, we're going to have to increase W just so we can access that RAM. That's kind of intuition behind, behind that. Okay, this is a way to, to bridge that reality where, which are fixed machines with theory and algorithms we care about that scalability for very large and we want to know with that growth function, what that growth function is and ignore the lead constant factor. When we're talking about asymptotic notation, that's, that's what we're talking about. We, we drop the constants, we look at those large, large orders in, in our equations and, and large paragraphs and things like that. For that, we need a notation of word size also changing in that same asymptotic way. Okay, that's gonna, we're going to talk about hashing and stuff next lecture. So that's, that's going to be more important for those lectures. But if we move on to dynamic sequence here. This is where things get a little more interesting. When we start with the static sequence, all of these operations are still something we want to support in a dynamic sequence. But we add to dynamic operations somewhat controversial, controversial operations, but very exciting. I want to be able to insert in the middle of my sequence and I want to be able to delete from the middle of my sequence. Here, anyway, I've tried to write this out in stuff that will make sense, but here's my sequence, which I'm going to think of in a picture, we're drawing it here as an array but it's, it's stored, however it's stored, we don't know this isn't an interface. This is an interface, not an implementation of the interface. So, so we have x not x one x two x three here. Let's say I insert at position two, at position two here. Can you guys see my point? Hopefully you can see my point. Okay, position two here. So I would come in with my new x, and I would like x to be the new x two, but I don't want to lose any information. If I did set at two, then I would erase that plate replace it with this. I would call it x, but I want to do insert at which means all of these guys conceptually are going to shift over by one in their indices. Then I would get this picture that's that's one bigger here, one bigger. And now we've got this new x. I've got what was the old x two, which I don't, I guess I hesitate to call that x two because that is its old name not its new name the first ones are definitely unchanged here x not an x one. So we have our new x two, which, which we're calling prime x two prime. And then this would be our x three prime x four prime and so on we want to be careful here. And of course the new and prime is and plus one here. I'm not talking about the labeling because the key what makes insert at interesting is that later when I call get at it's with the new indexing so previously if I did get at at two, I would get this value. And afterwards if I did get at a two I would get the new value. So if I did get at three, then I would get the value that used to be x two right that that's maybe hard to track but this is a conceptually this is conceptually a very useful thing to do especially when you're inserting or deleting at the ends. So we're going to define in particular insert and delete first and last here. So if you do an insert, it would have next if you do a delay it has no argument so those are shown differently here. This means insert at the beginning of the array which would, which would add it to the front of course and then insert last would be adding it on to the back insert last does not change the indices of any of the old items. That's a nice feature of insert last insert first would change all of them of course they all get incremented by one. So, interested in the similar things here we could do get first, or last or set first or last which are the obvious special cases of gap and set at their particularly interesting in an algorithms context if you were a mathematician, you would say well why do I even bother this is just short and for particular call, or get to set but very interesting. What makes it interesting from a data structure perspective is that we care about algorithms for supporting these operations and maybe the algorithm for supporting get first or set first, or in particular insert first or insert last might be more efficient. Maybe we can solve this problem better than we can solve insert at so while ideally we can solve the entire dynamic sequence interface constant time. That's actually not possible. We can prove that, but special cases of it where we're just inserting and leading from the ends, say we can do that. That's why it's interesting to introduce special cases that we care about. So that's the dynamic, that's the definition of dynamic sequence interface. Now, now we're actually going to, to solve it here. Oh, yes. Okay, we're actually going to, to solve it. Our first data structure for this is called linked lists. You've taken probably, well you've probably seen linked lists before at some point, but the main new part here we're actually going to analyze them see how efficiently they implement all these operations we might care about. So, what is a linked list, what is a linked list. We store our items in a bunch of notes each note has an item in it and, and a next field. So you can think of these as class objects with two class variables, the item and the next pointer, and these arrows should technically be like in these next spots as well. So we're going to assemble those into, into this kind of structure where we store in the items fields we're going to store the actual values that we want to represent in our sequence. X knot through X sub n minus one in order. And then we're going to use the next pointers to link these all together in that order. So the next pointers are what actually give us the order and in addition, we're going to keep track of what's called the head of the list. So the data structure is going to be represented by a head. If you wanted to you could also store length. This could be the data structure itself. And anyway, it would point to all these, these types of different day structures. We did. You've probably just seen an array based data structure which is just a static array. So we're going to have a different based structure where we're relying on the fact that pointers can be stored in a single word, which means we can de reference them. We can see what's on the other side of the pointer in constant time in our word Ram model. So we're going to have these nodes is stored somewhere in the array on the array of the computer. So we're using this fact that we can allocate any array of size and in linear time in this case we're going to have arrays of size to here these are raised We can just say, oh, you know, give me the next give you a new array of size to and that will make us one of these, one of these nodes here. And then we're storing pointers pointers are just indices into the giant memory array there. They're just what what is the address of this little array. If you've ever wondered how pointers are implemented they are just numbers that say where in memory is this thing over here. And in memory there in an arbitrary order this is really nice because it's easy to manipulate the order of a linked list without actually physically moving the nodes around, whereas arrays are problematic. So that's maybe worth mentioning. Let's start analyzing things so we care about these dynamic sequence operations and we and we could try to apply it to the static array data structure, or we could try to implement these operations in a static array. It's possible just not going to be very good. And we can try to implement it with linked lists linked lists and static arrays, each have their advantage here. So let's first analyze dynamic sequence operations first on a static array static array, then on a linked list on a static array I think you can almost see if I try to insert at the beginning of the static array. That's kind of worst case right. If I insert first then everybody has to shift over we're going to maintain this invariant of a of I represents x, x, i, x of I. If I want to maintain that all times when I insert a new thing in front because the indices of all previous items change, I have to spend time to copy those over. I can do it in linear time but no better than linear time static array. Insert and delete anywhere. I'm saying anywhere here at anywhere. If you insert and delete at anywhere costs data and time, actually for two reasons reason number one is that if we are near the front then we have to do the shifting. I don't insert or delete the last element of the right is that is that easier than think about that because then if I insert the very last element none of the entities change. I'm just adding a new element so I don't have to do shifting so I can do insert and delete last in in constant time in a static array. The answer is no, because the size is constant. So our model is that remember allocation model is that we can allocate a static array. But it's, but it's just a size and I can't just say please make it bigger by one. I, you know, I need space to store this extra element. And if you think about where things are in memory when you call this to memory, which is part of your app, your operating system the memory allocator. You say, you know, please give me this chunk of memory and it's going to place them in various places in the memory and some of them might be next to each other. So if I try to grow an array by one, there might already be something there and that's not possible without first shifting. So even though in the array I don't have to do any shifting in memory, I might have to do some shifting. And that's outside the model. So we're just going to stick to this model of, of you can allocate memory you can also de allocate memory, just to keep space usage small. But the only way to get more space is to ask for a new array and that new array won't be contingent of your old one. In a static array, you're not just allowed to make it bigger. And so you have to allocate a new array, which we say takes linear time, even if allocating the new array didn't take linear time you have to copy all the elements over from the older a to the new one. Then you can throw, throw away the old one, but just copying from an array of size and to an array of size and plus one that that will take linear time. So static arrays are really bad for dynamic operations, not really surprising, but you could do them. So that, that's a static array. linked lists are are almost going to be the opposite. If we almost I guess, if we store the length. Okay, we can compute the length of the array very quickly we can insert and delete at the front really efficiently. If I want to add a new item as a first item, then what do I do. I allocate a new node which will call X. The, this is the insert first of X so we allocate a new array of size to let's say, I'm going to. Let's see. So, how, let me show you guys. Well, I've tried to show you here with arrows but but basically, we're going to, we're going to change that to be our new head pointer. And then you set the next pointer, you're going to change it's just like a growth you change your, your head pointer to be the new. If you have questions on that, I'll draw you a better diagram than what's on the slides here. This is where having like a whiteboard would be would be really nice if we're in person. Okay, so now we've got that linked list now we're linked here that's the point. We don't know anything about about the order and the memory of these linked lists, we just care about the order that's represented implicitly by following the next pointers, repeatedly. So we've got a new list that has X in front, then let's see. Okay, I don't want to skip ahead too much. So we've got a new list we've got X in front we've got X of zero X of one so on. So insert and delete first, at least are really efficient we won't get much more than that but the linked list, insert and delete first are constant time. So that's cool. However, everything else is going to be slow if I want to get the 10th item in a linked list I have to follow those pointers 10 times. I go zero 123 so on, follow the next 10 pointers and I'll get to the 10th, the 10th item accessing the item is going to take order I time, get and set at need I time, which in the worst case is, is theta n. We have a sort of complimentary data structures here on on the one hand a static array can do constant time, get at and set up. So it's very fast at the random access aspect because it's an array linked lists are very bad at random access but they're better at being dynamic. We can insert and delete at the beginning at least in constant time. Now if we want to actually insert and delete at a particular position that's still hard because we have to walk to that position, even inserting and leading at the end of a list is hard, although it's it's fixable. And maybe, maybe we'll leave that for problem session or problem set. But suppose you wanted to solve. I'll pose this suppose you wanted to solve get last efficiently in a linked list. How would you solve that in a constant time. Think about that for a second. I hear a lot of students say doubly linked list to this. And it is a good idea, but it's actually not the right answer here. I'll ask another question that in a few that we can come back to this idea of doubly linked lists. But often doubly linked has this I'm talking about pointer to the last element that's all we need here. So we'll list the tail head and tail. And if we always just store a pointer to the last list. This is what we call data structure augmentation, where we add some extra information to the data structure, and we have to keep it up to date all the time. And if we do an insert last or something insert last also becomes easy because I can just add a new node and update the pointer. Delete last is trickier that's where you get a doubly linked list. Whenever I add something to the end of the list I have to update the tail pointer I have to update the tail pointer also. And as long as we maintain this now suddenly get last is fast in constant time. And linked lists are great if you're working on the ends, even dynamically arrays are great if you're doing random access and nothing dynamic, nothing adding or deleting at the ends or in the middle. Our final goal for today is to get sort of the best of both worlds with dynamic arrays. Okay, so that's yeah that's that's we're going to go for today we're going to try to get all of the good running times of linked lists and all the good running times of static arrays won't quite get to all of them but most of them. And in some sense another way to describe what these introductory lectures are about is telling you about how Python is implemented. What what we're going to talk about next dynamic arrays I've alluded to many times but these are what Python calls lists. You don't have to implement a dynamic array by hand because it's already built into many fancy new languages for free and they're really useful. This lecture we're talking about how these are actually meant and why, why they're efficient the idea is to relax the constraint, or the invariant whatever you want to call that. The size of the array we use equals in, which is the number of items in the sequence remember in our in our sequence problem we're supposed to represent and items with a static array, we allocated an array of size, exactly and so let's relax that right. Let's not make it exactly and let's make it roughly and and how roughly, you know we can we can think about that for for a bit but from an algorithms perspective usually when we say roughly we may we mean to throw away the constant factors. And like how we talk about an asymptotic notation and runtime and big notation and things like that. That turns out to to also be the right answer here it's not always the right answer. But we're going to enforce that the size of the array is theta and probably also greater than or equal to 10.5 and would not would not be very helpful in this so it's going to be at least and it's going to be at most some constant times and two and 10 and 1.1 times and any of those constants would work. Let's use let's use to end here, but lots of options of course. And now things almost work for free really there's going to be one subtlety here and and I'm going to focus on we're still going to maintain that the item of the array represents exabyte this data structure. So we have an array of some size the first few items are going to store that sequence, but then there's going to be some blank ones at the end. Maybe we'll keep track of this so the data structure itself is is going to have an array and it's going to have a length something like that. We could also keep track of the length we want to know that the first length items are where the data is, and the remainder are meaningless anyway so now if I want to go and do an insert last. We just go to a of length and set it to x right and then and then we increment length of course. Yes. Okay, so then we go to a of length and then we increment we increment length here. Boom, boom, easy constant time, as long as I have this extra space this is all we need to do for insert last, but I'm also going to store the size of the array this is the actual this is the, the whole thing, this whole thing is size. This part is length here. Do I show that. Okay, so we have our interface. We have our data structure, because n equals size size of the array. Okay, so what do we do in the case where n equals our size then what do we do. What do we do when n equals size. Think about that. We're going to have to make the array bigger right. This should sound just like static arrays for static arrays we made our array bigger every time we inserted, and that was that was this linear cost of allocation. We're going to do, we're going to do that sometimes so with static arrays, we had to do it every single time because size equaled and now we have some flexibility we're only going to do it sometimes. But if n equals size, we're going to allocate a new array of size. What, hopefully you're thinking bigger. There's a couple natural choices here. One is a constant factor larger you can use 1.1 to 510 they'll all work. Or you could use a size plus a constant like five. But why is that bad. That's bad right because you'll have to do it again you'll have to resize frequently when five steps later. So in the original static array, we were reallocating every single time that's like n plus one. So if we did n plus five that really doesn't change things if we ignore the constant factors right now we'll have to spend linear time every five steps instead of linear time every one step. That's still linear time per operation just we're changing the constant factor, whereas two times size. Well now we have to to think a little bit harder let's just think about the case when we're inserting at the end of the array. Let's say we do n insert last from an empty array. When do we when do we resize. Well, at the beginning I guess I guess I didn't say what we do for an empty array. Let's say let's say size equals one, we can insert one item for free. As soon as we insert the second item, then we would have to resize that that seems bad. Immediately we have to resize then we insert the third item. Okay, so we start to, you know, we start with one item we fill it up then we grow to size to because that's twice of one then we fill it up. Immediately we have to to resize again, but now we start to get some benefit now we have size for so we can insert two items before we have to resize and now we're size eight we still get to insert for items before we refill. So this is going to resize and again resize is our expensive both because we have to pay to allocate the new array. We're creating a whole new array, and then we have to copy all of the items over. So there's the allocation cost, and then the copying costs it's linear either way, but what we're going, but we're going to resize at n equals 124816 you, you know that sequence all the powers of two, because we're doubling. That that is exactly powers of two so we pay a linear cost. This resize cost, the allocation in the copying is is going to be it's linear each time. And I've kind of added this back through through those those initial slides but it's going to be linear each time so it's one plus two plus four plus eight plus 16. And we could write this as the sum from I equals one to roughly log of n right log base to have been really in if you want a permanent it's roughly and so so that anyway what what is that called this is called. What's the sum of two to that. It's called a geometric series series. Anyway, I'll give you a second to think about that. What, what's the sum of that to to to the top limit, plus one minus one. Right. That's it. That's identity some some of two to the I from I equals one to K is to to the K plus one minus one. So plus one goes upstairs minus one goes downstairs. The higher level thing here to say it would be oh this is a geometric series. So, so I know you should know this I'm telling you now geometric series are dominated by the last term the biggest term. So, in this series you can identify as geometric which means it's growing at least exponentially, then in terms of data notation, you can just look at the last term and put a theta theta around it and you're done. So this is theta of the last term, like to to the log n, which is data in. So linear time linear time for all my operations I'm doing and operations here I spent linear time linear total time doing all of the resizing. That's good. That's, that's kind of like a constant factor each kind of right. That's an important notation. This kind of is what we're going to call amortization here. So, I want to say an operation takes T of an amortized time. If let's say any K of those operations take at most K times T of n time. This is a little bit sloppy here on the slide but good enough. The idea here is if this works for n or K to do and operations from an empty array here takes linear time, which means I would call this constant amortized amortized is a particular kind of averaging averaging over the sequence of operations. So while individual operations will be expensive. One near the end when I have to resize the array is going to take linear time just for that one operation, but most of the operations are cheap, most of them are constant so I can think of charging that high cost to all of the other operations that made it happen. So this is averaging over the operation sequence. Every insert last only takes constant time on average over the sequence of operations that we do. So it's almost constant. It's not quite as good as constant worst case but it's almost as good. And it's as good as you could hope to do in this dynamic array allocation model. I'll put this in a table here. We have on top the main operations of sequence interface which will revisit in later lectures. We'll see some other data structures for this. We've got get at and set at on the first column, insert and and delete first insert and delete last insert and delete at an arbitrary We've seen three data structures now arrays were really good at get at and set at they took a constant time. That's the blue one. We're omitting the status here. Also, all of the other operations took linear time no matter what they were linked lists were really good at insert and delete and delete first. They took constant time but everything else took linear time in the worst case these new dynamic arrays achieve get at and set at in constant time because they maintain this invariant that we were talking about of a of I equals X of I. So we can still do get at and set at quickly. And we also just showed that insert last is constantly amortized constant amortized. Delete last you don't have to resize the array you could just decrease length and and boom you've you've deleted the last term it's not super satisfying even though. Anyway, it's not so satisfying because if you insert and items and then delete and items you still have an array of size data and even though your current value of n is zero so that there's more to this. We're only going to do very simple amortized analysis in this class to prove that that algorithm is is also constant amortized. So, so for this time. Thanks for watching.