Okay. Welcome everybody to lecture 14 of 381. This is our last lecture for now on graph algorithms in particular. The last lecture we'll have on weighted shortest paths for sure. We're going to talk about a slightly different problem today, different than single source shortest paths. We're going to be talking about all pairs shortest paths today.

First, let's review our single source shortest paths algorithms. We have BFS, we had DAG relaxation, Deekstras, which we saw last time, which gets pretty close to linear. V log V plus E is pretty close to linear here. It's much closer to linear than the general algorithm we have for solving single source shortest paths, namely Bellman-Fort, which is a little bit more like a quadratic. This is like the difference between, for sparse graphs, this is like the difference between sorting using insertion sort and N squared and merge sort and N log N. For example, we're going to get actually quite a bit big of a bonus for large input sizes using Deekstras when we can.

Today, we're going to be focusing on this new problem called all pairs shortest paths here. It's not really complicated. Instead of having a single source, we're essentially wanting to, given an input, this way to graph where we've got graph V, E, and we've got a weight function from the edges to the integers. We want our output to be something like the shortest path distance from U to V for every U and V in our vertex set. That's what we want to return. Now, there's one caveat here that if there's a negative weight cycle in our graph, in other words, if any of these delta UVs is minus infinity, there's a negative rate cycle in our graph.

So unless I guess or abort if G contains a negative weight cycle, we're not actually going to worry about negative weight cycles in today's class. If we have a graph, it could have negative weights. These are any integers. It could include negative weight edges. But as long as all our path distances are bounded from below, none of them are negative infinity. We don't have any negative weight cycles.

Then I want you to output all of these shortest path distances. Now, in particular, this output could any of these outputs need to have size theta of V squared because for every pair of vertices, I need to return to you a number or infinity or minus infinity or something like that. But we're not dealing with a case with minus infinity. The output could have size. It does have size V squared. But in particular, it's at least V squared because I need to give a number for each pair of vertices.

And so we couldn't help for a linear time in the size of this graph for this problem, right? Single source shortest path for certain versions of the problem. We need to read the graph. And so we need to use linear time. But in this problem, our output has quadratic size in the number of vertices. So in a sense, we can't do better than this.

We can't do better than quadratic. And actually, what's one way we could solve all pairs shortest path by using stuff we've already done in this class? What's one way we could do that? Well, we could just solve a single source shortest paths algorithm for every vertex in my graph, right? That seems like a silly thing to do. It's almost brute force on all the vertices, but it's certainly a way that we could solve this problem in polynomial time.

And we could definitely solve it in order V squared E time using Bellman-Ford. We just take V steps of Bellman-Ford and deal with the graph on any set of vertices. We can do better than this. We can do do better than this for graphs that are special in some way. We can do V times V. No, yes, V times V plus E V times times linear, right?

If our weights are positive and bounded, we can use BFS V times. Or if our graph doesn't have cycles, we could use DAG relaxation V times. Or if our graph has non-negative edge weights, we could get basically V squared log V plus V times E. And that's actually not bad. In sparse graphs, this is what Bellman-Ford would give us. But if we had D shows, for example, if we had all positive edge weights or non-negative, sorry, we could get V squared log V plus V E time.

Then that's V times D extra. OK, so how do our running times compare? We're looking at we have V times Bellman-Ford. This is that we have V times D extra. Let's just get a feel for the separation here. If we had a sparse graph where V is upper bounded by the number of vertices, the D shows one looks like V squared log V.

The Bellman-Ford one looks like V cubed and we need to spend at least V squared time. So actually, D extra's one is really close to linear in the size of the graph, just off by a log factor, just like sorting wood and tail. And the Bellman-Ford one would have a linear factor in the sparse graph. This would be a linear factor worse than that instead of a logarithmic factor. Again, this linear to log separation. We don't want to have to do the Bellman-Ford running time if we don't have to.

That's the name of the game. And really, all we're going to do in this lecture is try to solve how we can make our running time faster by doing something a little bit more intelligent than running a single source shortest path algorithm from every vertex. How are we going to do that? The idea here, if we had a graph, OK, so here's a directed graph. Why do I not care about undirected graphs? It's because I don't care about undirected graphs because if I had an undirected graph, I could detect whether I had negative weight cycles in constant time.

I'm sorry, in linear time, I could just check each edge, see if it has a negative weight. Because it has a negative weight edge, an undirected edge, it is a cycle of negative weight. So if it has any negative edge weight, I could return in linear time that it does and I can abort. Or it only has positive edge weights and I can still use deatrous. So that's all good. So we're only concerned about needing to run Bellman-Ford on directed graphs that potentially have negative edge weight.

OK, so here's a graph and let's say this is S and our source is in the bottom left here and we have weights as shown. So this is an example of a graph we might want to run all pairs shortest pass on. Also note this graph doesn't have negative weight cycles. There is no S in all pairs shortest pass. But I'm going to be talking about a couple of shortest paths from S in my next argument. So I'm just labeling our vertex as S here.

OK, so the claim, the approach we're going to do, we're going to try to take a graph that has negative edge weights, directed graph. We don't know if it has negative cycles or not yet. We want to compute all pairs shortest paths, not in the Bellman-Ford running time, but in the Deastros running time. And how can we do that? Well, maybe it's possible that we can change the way of every edge so that they're all positive, but shortest paths are preserved. So basically, if a particular path like, OK, the shortest path from S to T here is is one, two, three, right?

I could change edge weights in this graph. Say, for example, if I changed one of the ones to be a zero, that would still make that my shortest path. That that changed weights in my graph, but the shortest path remained the same. Right. So maybe there's a way I could reweight my edges so that the shortest paths stay the same, the shortest paths are preserved. So idea here, make edge weights non-negative while preserving shortest paths.

In other words, just reweight the edges so that the shortest paths in G, this is G after we reweight, will go to some graph G prime with the same combinatorial structure, just different edge weights. Right. And and we want shortest paths. We we want these weights to all be non-negative and we want shortest paths. If there's a shortest path in G, it continues to be a shortest path in the reweighted graph. Right.

That's a goal for today. If we can do that transformation and this is non-negative, then we're done. We're done because we can just run Disha V times on that new graph, get the shortest path distances, construct a shortest path tree from those distances, and then traverse that tree in the original graph and compute shortest paths along that tree. So that's the claim. So claim we can compute distances in G. So we're going to restrict G prime to to have with non-negative edge weights.

If we have such a G prime with non-negative edge weights, we can compute distances in G from distances in G prime in V times V plus E, which is smaller than our Dikstra's running time. So that would be fine. Right. What do we do? We we have our new graph G prime that has all positive edge weights. So we run all pairs shortest paths in here by just running Dikstra's V times.

And then for each vertex S, we have some shortest path tree to all the things that it's connected to. All right. So so first we we first wanted to find we're wanting to make edge weights non-negative while preserving our shortest paths, because if we could do that, we could solve our original all pairs shortest paths problem. But how can we do this? OK, it doesn't even seem like this could be possible generally. How can I just reweight the edges and maintain the shortest path trees, maintain them, you know, have them be the same?

That seems hard to do. And in particular, if there's a negative weight cycle in this graph, it's impossible to do. So claim here. It's not possible if G contains a negative weight cycle. So if G contains a negative weight cycle, then in particular, the shortest path distance or a shortest path in G, if if this graph here is G, say we have a negative weight cycle, directed cycle C here. In particular, the shortest path from vertex S to T on the cycle.

What is its shortest path? It's it's infinite, right? A shortest path is infinite around that cycle. You just keep going around the cycle over and over and over again because it has a negative weight. Weight of C is less than zero strictly. That's what a negative weight cycle is.

OK, so the shortest path, a shortest path from S to T has infinite length and in particular is non simple. However, so so shortest path from S to T is non simple. But as we proved in the last lecture, shortest paths in a graph with non negative weights are what they are are simple, right? Because they're just shortest path trees. So that's a contradiction. So this is not possible.

So given a graph with negative weights, but no negative cycle, it's still not clear how we would find such a reweighting of the graph. Can we do this? Well, we're going to exploit a little idea here. How can we transform the weights of a graph? Well, how? What's what's a what's a silly?

OK, I have a silly idea. If I don't want negative edge weights in this graph, you you got edge weights one minus two, zero, one, four, five and one. There's only one negative edge weight here. What if I just added a large number or in particular, the negative of the smallest edge in my graph to every edge in my graph? Then I'll have a graph with non negative weights. Fantastic.

Why? Why is that not a good idea? Well, in particular, if I did that to this graph, if I added two to every edge, the weight of the path one, one, one, which was the shortest path changed from weight three to weight nine because I added two to every edge. But in the far right path, which wasn't a shortest path in the original graph, it had a weight four increased by only two. Now that's the shortest path or it's a it's a shorter path than our original shortest path of ones along the left side. So the original one now can't be the shortest path.

So that transformation sure would would make all the weights non negative, but it would not preserve shortest paths. In particular, if I added the same edge weight to every edge, I will bias towards taking paths that have fewer edges, not just smaller weight. So the first idea doesn't work. So idea, add large number to each edge. This is bad. Makes it makes weights non negative, but does not preserve shortest path.

So this is not a good idea. A bad, bad idea here. Is there any way you can think of to modify the edge weights in a graph in any way that will preserve shortest paths? Think about that for a sec. So so here's an idea for you, which is kind of this critical step in Johnson's. And in a lot of graph transformation algorithms, if I have a vertex, say, say this this middle guy, say V here, every path from V goes through an outgoing edge of V and every path going into V goes through an edge going into V, right?

That that observation is critical here. If I add a number to all outgoing edges from a vertex and I subtract that same number from the weights of all incoming edges to that vertex, then every path from V is changed by the same amount because every path from V goes through one of those outgoing edges and any path going into V has also changed by the same amount. In particular, it's changed by a by a negative, whatever we added to the outgoing edges. So such a transformation, adding a number from all the outgoing edges from a vertex and subtracting the same number from all the incoming edges preserves shortest paths. That's a claim. So idea, this is better, a better idea.

Given vertex V, add weight H to all outgoing edges and subtract weight to all incoming edges. So that's the idea. And the claim is this this transformation shortest paths are preserved under this transformation. And why is that? It's kind of the exact same argument that I had before. So proof, consider any path in my graph, either if the path, the path could go through V many times or it could go through not at all.

If my, if I have a path in my original graph G, then with path weight W of Pi, this is my path that goes through V some number of times, right? So I'm going to say that this is going from S to T. If it crosses V, if it, if it never crosses V, if it never touches V, the vertex that I transformed, then I argue that the pathway is the same because I didn't do anything to edges that are in this path. Alternatively, this thing goes through V sometimes. If it goes through V in the middle, how is the way of my path changed? Well, it hasn't, right?

Because I added a number to all outgoing edges. Let's call it H. So there's an outgoing edge with weight I've changed by H. And there's an incoming edge here that I've changed with, changed by weight negative H. So those cancel out and you've got zero. So passing through a vertex doesn't change the weight of my path.

The, the only way I could change the weight of my path is if V is the start vertex or the end vertex. So it's possible that S is my vertex or T is my vertex, right? Well, for any path leaving V, I will have increased the weight. Of that path by H because I added a weight H to all outgoing edges. So again, while the pathway has changed since all the paths leaving V have changed by the same amount, a shortest path will still be a shortest path. And same goes for T.

If, if T, the end vertex is V, I'll have subtracted H from all my incoming edges, which means that any path ending at T, any directed path ending at T, also changes by the same value. And so shortest paths must be preserved. So that's a pretty cool transformation. I can assign for any vertex such a transformation, which affects all of the edges surrounding it by this H additive factor, either added or subtracted. So maybe, and I can do this independently for every vertex, right? The shortest paths were preserved by me doing this to one vertex.

Then if I do it to another vertex, then shortest paths are still perver, preserved and let's prove that really quickly. What I'm going to do is I'm going to want to do this to give me flexibility for changing all the edge weights in my graph to have this property. I'm going to set or define a potential function H that maps vertices to integers. So this is the potential H of V. And then we're going to make a graph G prime based on the above transformation for each vertex in V. So I'm going to set a number and H for each vertex.

These are independent now. And I'm going to add that potential to all outgoing edges. I'm going to and I'm going to subtract that potential from all incoming edges. This transformation is going to preserve shortest paths. Let's actually be a little bit more rigorous that that's the case when we do this multiple times, right? So I claimed then shortest paths are still preserved.

Okay. All right. Okay. So that's again, not so difficult to see it passes through a bunch of vertices. I'm going to label these as V naught to V K so that I can kind of number them here. This is a directed path.

We've got V, you know, V one, two, three, four all the way up to K. So there are K edges in this graph. And I claimed to you that any path from V naught to V K, any shortest path from V naught to V K remains the shortest path after I reweight everything in this way. So let's say this path, let's say this is path pi. And so it has weight W pi, which is really just the sum of all the edge weights from VI minus one to VI four I, um, in one to K, right? And we've got, uh, it indexes from one.

That's the first edge to K, which is the last edge. So that's the weight of my path. The weight of my transformed path at the bottom of the slide, I'm going to say is the weight in this new way to graph G prime. This is the weight of that same path. Uh, it's the same path. It's just going to be the sum of all the related edges.

So I equals one to K of my original weight of my edge. So from zero, I minus one to VI. But what did I do? Um, this, this edge is outgoing from VI minus one. So it's outgoing. So I add that, uh, so I add that weight, that potential, sorry, but that edge is also incoming into VI.

So when I reweighted the thing, I got a subtraction of HVI. Now what happens here in the sum, this, this term, if I just took the sum over that term, that's exactly my original pathway. So that's good, but you'll notice that the sum portion has K terms and we have the subtraction of K other terms, but most of our terms are equal along the path, all that incoming and outgoing edges, all the, the incoming and outgoing edges cancel out. So we're left with only adding the potential at the starting vertex and subtracting the potential at the final vertex. So we've got, um, add H V naught minus H VK. And why is that good?

Well, that's good because every path from V naught to VK starts at V naught and ends at VK. That's just, that's how it is, right? That's, that's how we define paths going from V naught to VK. But such paths, we, but, but every, I should say every such path, uh, we transform the weight of that path by adding a constant associated with the start and adding the value associated with the end. And so every path going from V naught to VK changes by the same amount. And so if this path pie was shortest, it's still shortest in the reweight of graph because I've just changed all the paths between those two vertices by the same amount.

This is kind of like a telescoping argument here in, in that kind of proof. Uh, right. So, so we have, um, the weight changes, they could change, but all, but it changes all paths between these two vertices by the same amount, which means shortest paths are still preserved. Okay. Awesome. So the, the name of the game here is now we have this really flexible tool.

We have this tool where we can add or subtract weights from various edges, but we have to do it in, in a kind of localized or constrained way. We have to do that same thing around each vertex, but it seems like a powerful transformation technique that maybe we can get this thing we want, which is a G prime, a reweighting of a graph where all the edge weights are positive or non-negative. So does there exist an H such that the weights are all positive? What, what does that mean? W prime, you, uh, W prime, UV, the weight in my new graph in G prime. I want these modified weights, this, this modified weight of my graph.

I want each of these to be non-negative. So does, is there such a thing? Does, does there exist such a thing? Um, well, if I rearrange this equation a little bit, the right side, I get something that looks like H of V needs to be less than or equal to H of U plus the weight of some edge from U to V. And what does that look like? That looks almost exactly like the definition of triangle inequality.

That we've talked about shortest path from some vertex and it's shortest path distance from the same vertex. This is just a statement of the triangle inequality. So if we can set these H's to be the shortest path distance from some vertex and the shortest path distances are finite and not, not minus infinity, then this thing will hold by triangle equality, inequality. Sorry. And in particular, uh, if we were to reweight the edges based on those values of H, then we get new edge rates that are non-negative. Awesome.

But there might not be any vertex from which we can access, which we can reach all vertices in the graph. In particular, my graph might not be even connected. Uh, if I want this property, I need all, uh, I don't gain any information if these things are, are infinite. It's ex, it's exhaustively true. Um, infinity is, I don't even know how to compare infinity and infinity plus a constant. I don't know.

So I need all of these things to be finite. So how can I make all of these things finite? Um, here's, here's the next idea. And, um, so, so we add new vertex S with zero weight edge to every vertex V and V. Okay. We take our original graph, we add a, a super node or auxiliary vertex S with a zero weight edge to every vertex in my graph.

Okay. Was it look like this is, uh, so there's my original graph. Now I have this vertex S, but it has directed edges, um, into all the vertices with zero weight. Okay. That's our picture. And this new thing I'm going to call maybe my graph, uh, S now.

And the claim will now, if I run some shortest pass algorithm, uh, single source shortest path algorithm this time from S to compute the shortest path distance to all of the vertices, the shortest distance to each of the vertices can't be positive because they're the zero weight edge. So a minimum weight path is going to be no bigger than zero. If it's, uh, finite, then there's a finite length shortest path. If it's minus infinity, then there's a negative rate cycle, native way cycle in my graph and I can stop, right? So there are either two situations if Delta S V equals minus infinity. So, so we are running single source shortest paths from S.

And really, because this graph could contain negative edge weights and could contain negative cycles, we can't really do better than running Belman forward here from S to compute these paths. If there exists, uh, in this new graph, uh, if there exists a vertex that has negative infinite weight in the re, no, in the original graph G, G hasn't been reweighted yet. If they're the negative weight distance from S, then there was a negative weight cycle in my original graph. Why is that? Okay. Well, if, if this was set to minus infinity, then there is some negative weight cycle in my graph.

The worry is that the negative weight cycle was added to my graph by adding this vertex S, but what do I know about my vertex S? It has no incoming edges. So no negative weight cycle could go through S. So any negative weight cycle was in my original graph. And so I can abort, right? Abort.

Yay. Um, otherwise what do I do? Well, I know the shortest past distance distances here would satisfy, uh, Okay. Sorry. Technology malfunction. Okay.

So, um, I know the shortest past distances here would satisfy the triangle inequality. So if I reweight with H of V equals, uh, delta of S V, if we set our potentials in our reweighted graph to be the shortest distance, I'm sorry, the shortest path distance from our super node S, it satisfies the triangle inequality. Okay. Um, and because there's no negative cycles, all of these values are finite. And then this reweighting will lead to a graph with, uh, not strictly or not strictly with strictly no negative weights or non-negative weights. Okay.

So that's basically it. That's the idea behind Johnson's algorithm. It, it's really a reduction problem or, or a reduction algorithm. We are reducing from solving kind of, uh, all pairs shortest past graphs where their weights could be, be positive or negative. And we're reducing to creating a graph that has the same shortest past properties, but only has non-negative edge weights. So we're reducing from a signed context to a non-negative weight context.

Okay. Um, so Johnson's algorithms, uh, algorithm, what are the steps then? So construct, um, G S from G just as before, I, I make a new vertex S. I put a zero weight directed edge from S to every vertex. That's the first step. Second step, compute, uh, ESV for all V and V, um, by Bellman Ford.

This is just a, a single run of Bellman Ford here. And then there's two possibilities. If there exists a Delta SV, that's minus infinity, then abort. Else make or, or reweight the graph according to this reweighting scheme by reweighting each edge in my original graph to have, um, weight, our, our new weight, which is our old weight plus our transformation. Now our transformation is, is now going to set HV to this Delta SV. So I'm going to add Delta SU and subtract Delta SV.

That's our reweighting scheme. I'm just identifying HV with this shortest path distance here. And after I reweighted that, I can just solve all pairs shortest paths on G prime with de-stress. Then, um, and then compute G shortest path distances from G prime shortest path distances, okay? Um, compute these distances from, from the other using this algorithm here. I can compute distances in G from distances in G prime, uh, in V times linear time, uh, linear time for each S for each vertex in my graph, right?

So that's the algorithm. It's basically, uh, correct, correctness is, is trivial. We already proved the whole part of this lecture, the interesting part of this lecture was proving that if we had a transformation based on a potential function that changed outgoing edges in a symmetrically opposite way as incoming edges, edges, then that proves, uh, that we're preserving shortest paths. And then realizing that the triangle inequality enforces this condition, that edge weights will be non-negative under this reweighting. Um, so we find shortest path distances from some other arbitrary vertex and set our potential functions to be those shortest path distance weights. Uh, we do the reweighting because that reweighting preserved shortest pass, which we already argued, then we can do then, then this has shortest, I'm sorry, has positive edge weights.

So de-stress applies. And then computing this takes a small amount of time. Um, okay. So now I want to go. Here. Okay.

Um, so what's the running time of this algorithm? So the first part, reconstructing this thing, this takes linear time. I'm just adding, I'm just making a new graph of the same size, except I added V edges and one vertex computing, uh, doing Bellman forward on this new modified graph. That's just, I'm doing that once that takes V times E time doing the check. It just takes, um, I'm looping over my vertices. That just takes V time.

Otherwise doing this reweighting, I changed the weight of every edge. That takes order E time. And then solving G prime, solving all pairs shortest paths on the modified edge weights graph with de-stress takes V times de-stress. That's V times V log V plus E time, which is actually the running time that we're looking for. I wanted to reduce to not using more than this time. We use that amount of time.

Uh, let's make sure we didn't still use even more. Um, so after that, we compute these paths as proof before in V times V plus E, which is smaller than that, right? And so summing up all of these running times, um, we have one that dominates, right? And so Johnson's can solve single weighted all pairs shortest paths, um, uh, signed all pairs shortest paths, not in V times Bellman forward, like we had before in the first part of this lecture, but faster and nearly linear for sparse graphs, just without the log factor. So we got quite a big improvement here, right? Um, so that's the nice thing about all pairs shortest paths is that really, we don't have to incur this big cost in the context of negative weights, especially we just run Bellman forward once to see if there is a negative weight cycle in my graph.

If it is, I save a lot of work by stopping early. So that's Johnson's. That's, that's kind of our graphs lectures. We've talked a lot about different things so far. Uh, we talked about graph reachability, connect the components, detecting cycles, detecting, uh, topological sort orders of a DAG. So we've talked about finding negative edge weights, um, single source shortest path algorithms, and now finally today, all pair shortest path problems with a new algorithm that's, that's really not an entirely new algorithm.

We didn't have to do any proof by induction here. Uh, really the heavy work that's happening is we're reducing to either Deakstra or Bellman forward to do the heavy lifting of finding single source shortest paths efficiently. Uh, so Johnson's is really just glue to transform from a graph in a clever way and then reducing to using some of the shortest past algorithms faster. So that's our unit on graphs and our next lecture, we'll start talking about a general form of not, not presenting you as an algorithm, but how to decide your own algorithm, uh, design your own algorithm in the context of, of dynamic programming. So that will be our next lecture and I'll see you then.